OPERATIONS MANUAL (OM) – REVISION 6.0

PART 2 – TECHNICAL

0. OUTLINE

1. AIRCRAFT DESCRIPTIVE NOTES
1.1 Cessna C172SP – G1000
1.2 Diamond DA42

2. AIRCRAFT HANDLING
2.1 Checklists
2.2 Standard Operating Procedures
2.3 Limitations
2.4 Maintenance
2.5 Aircraft Journey Logs
2.6 Technical Logs
2.7 Aircraft Weighing Procedures

3. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
3.1 Emergency Procedures – C172SP – G1000
3.2 Emergency Procedures – DA42

4. RADIO AND NAVIGATION AIDS
4.1 Cessna C172SP – G1000
4.2 Diamond DA42

5. MINIMUM EQUIPMENT LIST (MEL)

6. INSTRUMENTS, DATA AND EQUIPMENT
6.1 Airplanes





1. AIRCRAFT DESCRIPTIVE NOTES

1.1 Cessna C172SP – G1000

The aircraft used for Flight Training within EuroPilot Center include the Cessna C172SP – G1000.

The C172SP (Skyhawk) is an all-metal, four-place, high-wing, single-engine aircraft equipped with tricycle landing gear and designed for general utility and training purposes.

Engine
Number of engines: 1
Engine manufacturer: Textron Lycoming
Engine model number: IO-360-L2A
Engine type: Normally aspirated, direct drive, air-cooled, horizontally opposed, fuel injected, four-cylinder engine with 360.0 cu.in. displacement
Horsepower rating and engine speed: 180 BHP at 2700 RPM

Propeller
Propeller manufacturer: McCauley Propeller Systems
Propeller model number: 1A170E/JHA7660
Number of blades: 2
Propeller diameter: 76 inches
Propeller type: Fixed pitch

Fuel
Approved fuels: AVGAS 100LL or AVGAS 100
Total capacity: 56.0 US gallons
Total usable: 53.0 US gallons
Total capacity each tank: 28.0 US gallons
Total usable each tank: 26.5 US gallons

Oil
Approved oil (all temperatures): W100 or equivalent (refer to maintenance)
Oil sump capacity: 8.0 US quarts
Total oil capacity: 9.0 US quarts

Dimensions
Wingspan: 11 m
Wing area: 16.16 square meters
Length: 8.3 m
Tail height: 2.5 m
Propeller ground clearance: 28.6 cm
Minimum turn radius: 8.4 m

Masses
Standard empty mass: 755 kg
Maximum useful load (traffic load + usable fuel): 405 kg
Maximum ramp mass (normal category): 1,160 kg
Maximum ramp mass (utility category): 1,000 kg
Maximum take-off mass (normal category): 1,156 kg
Maximum take-off mass (utility category): 998 kg
Maximum landing mass (normal category): 1,156 kg
Maximum landing mass (utility category): 998 kg



1.2 Diamond DA42

The Diamond DA42 is a composite, four-place, low-wing, multi-engine aircraft equipped with tricycle landing gear and designed for general utility and training purposes.

Engine
Number of engines: 2
Engine manufacturer: Continental
Engine model number: CD-135
Engine type: Liquid-cooled, four-cylinder, four-stroke diesel-cycle engine with wet sump lubrication, inline construction, common-rail direct injection, reduction gear (1:1.69)
Horsepower rating and engine speed: 135 HP at 2,300 RPM per engine

Propellers
Propeller manufacturer: MT-Propeller
Number of blades: 3
Propeller type: Constant speed, feathering
Propeller diameter: 187 cm
Propeller pitch angle:
12 degrees (low pitch)
15 degrees (start lock)
81 degrees (feathered)

Fuel
Approved fuels:
Jet A-1 (ASTM D1655)
Jet A (ASTM D1655)
Jet Fuel No. 3 (GB6537-94)
Diesel (EN 590) and blends

Total capacity without auxiliary tanks: 52.0 US gallons
Total usable without auxiliary tanks: 50.0 US gallons
Total capacity with auxiliary tanks: 79.4 US gallons
Total usable with auxiliary tanks: 76.4 US gallons
Total capacity each main tank: 26.0 US gallons
Total usable each main tank: 25.0 US gallons
Total capacity each auxiliary tank: 13.7 US gallons
Total usable each auxiliary tank: 13.2 US gallons

Oil and Coolants
Approved engine oil:
Shell Helix Ultra 5W-30
Shell Helix Ultra 5W-40
Aeroshell Oil Diesel 10W-40
or equivalent (refer to maintenance)

Approved gearbox oil:
Shell EP 75W90 API GL-4
Shell Spirax GSX 75W-80

Approved coolant:
Water / BASF Glysantin Protect Plus / G48

Dimensions
Wingspan: 13.42 m
Wing area: 16.29 square meters
Length: 8.56 m
Tail height: 2.49 m

Masses
Minimum flight mass: 1,250 kg
Maximum take-off mass:
1,700 kg (without MAM 42-088)
1,785 kg (with MAM 42-088)

Maximum zero fuel mass:
1,674 kg (with OAM 42-188 and OAM 42-195)

Maximum landing mass:
1,700 kg (without MAM 42-088)
1,785 kg (with MAM 42-195)

Maximum load in nose baggage compartment: 30 kg
Maximum load in cabin baggage extension: 18 kg
Maximum load cabin baggage compartment and extension combined: 45 kg

2. AIRCRAFT HANDLING

2.1 Checklists

2.1.1 Use of Checklists
The standard way of operating the aircraft in single-pilot operations is by means of checklists. There are three types of checklists:

Scan flows
Read and do
Recall

Scan flows are performed from top to bottom and from left to right. Every instrument and switch in the cockpit is checked in a logical order and the required actions are performed for the relevant phase of flight. Scan flows can be performed both on the ground and in flight.

Read-and-do checklists are performed only on the ground, with the exception of specific emergency checklists. An item is read out and thereafter the required action is performed.

Recall checklists are performed by heart. All in-flight checklists are recall checklists and must be known by heart at all times.

All checklists must be carried out loud and clear and announced, for example “Before Start Checklist”, and finished with “Before Start Checklist Completed”.



2.1.2 Checklist Overview
The following checklists will be performed for the applicable aircraft types:

External inspection (walk-around)
Before starting engine
Starting engine
After start
Taxi
Before take-off
Line-up
Take-off
After take-off / climb
Cruise
Descent / approach
Landing
Go-around
After landing
Securing the aircraft

Reference is made to:

OM Annex 03 – Checklist Cessna 172SP
OM Annex 04 – Cross Reference List C172SP Checklist
OM Annex 25 – Checklist Diamond DA42



2.2 Standard Operating Procedures

2.2.1 Cessna C172SP – G1000
Reference is made to OM Annex 07 – Standard Operating Procedures Cessna C172SP.

2.2.2 Diamond DA42
Reference is made to the Pilot Operating Handbook (POH), Section 4A – Normal Operating Procedures.



2.3 Limitations

All aircraft shall be operated in accordance with the applicable operating limitations as described in the Pilot Operating Handbook (POH).

For the Cessna C172SP – G1000, reference is made to POH Part 2 – Operating Limitations, Chapters 2-4 through 2-23.

For the Diamond DA42, reference is made to POH Section 1 – Limitations, Pages 2-4 through 2-36.



2.4 Maintenance

2.4.1 Maintenance Organisation Subcontractor
Aircraft maintenance is provided in accordance with applicable EASA regulations via the following subcontractors:

STYL AVIATION – EASA Part-M Subpart F
ASP AVIONICS – EASA Part-145
LAMBERT AIRCRAFT ENGINEERING
LA QUINTA AIR SERVICES (USA – FAA Repair Station)



2.4.2 CAMO Subcontractor
Continuing Airworthiness Management is provided by STYL AVIATION in accordance with EASA Part-M.



2.4.3 Release to Service after Maintenance
No aircraft may be released to service unless a Certificate of Release to Service has been issued in accordance with EASA Part-M.



2.5 Aircraft Journey Logs

In accordance with NCO.GEN.150, each journey shall be retained for each flight, or series of flights, in the form of a journey log or equivalent.

The aircraft journey log should include the following items where applicable:

Aircraft nationality and registration
Date
Name of crew member(s)
Duty assignments of crew members, if applicable
Place of departure
Place of arrival
Time of departure
Time of arrival
Hours of flight
Nature of flight
Incidents and observations, if any
Signature of the pilot-in-command

The aircraft journey logs provided by the country of registration of the relevant aircraft, fulfilling the requirements above, shall be used within EuroPilot Center.

The aircraft journey log must be filled out by the flight instructor or by the student in case of solo flights.



Electronic Dispatch / Check-In System
The online scheduling system provides an electronic backup for the paper logbooks and is used to record, distribute and communicate important flight data to the EuroPilot Center administration, including:

Flight and instruction times
Maintenance follow-up
Trouble report items
Fuel consumption
Instructor and student duty times
Special remarks

Before each training session, the instructor is responsible for dispatching the flight by verifying the Hobbs and/or Tacho times entered by the previous pilot and the expected fuel and oil on board.

Immediately after each training session, the instructor is responsible for checking the flight in and entering the Hobbs and/or Tacho times, remaining fuel and oil, flight and ground instruction times and trouble report items.

This task may be delegated to an Operations Officer, but the final responsibility remains with the instructor.



2.6 Technical Logs

2.6.1 Aircraft Defect Reporting
All aircraft defects must be reported immediately before, during or after the flight by the Pilot-in-Command in the applicable paper Aircraft Trouble Report and via the electronic check-in process.

Any deferred aircraft defect shall be reported by the responsible maintenance engineer in the applicable paper and electronic Aircraft Trouble Report.

When an item has been repaired, it must be signed off by the maintenance engineer, including a description of the action taken.

It remains the responsibility of the Pilot-in-Command to check the paper and electronic Trouble Report before each flight in order to assess the airworthiness requirements for the intended operation.

Reference is made to:

OM Annex 10 – Trouble Report C172SP G1000
OM Annex 11 – Trouble Report Robinson R44
OM Annex 30 – Trouble Report Diamond DA42



2.6.2 Procedure in Case of Aircraft Defects
2.6.2.1 Defect Discovered by the Pilot-in-Command
The Pilot-in-Command shall contact the applicable maintenance subcontractor. The authorized maintenance engineer shall decide whether the defect seriously affects flight safety or whether it can be deferred.

If deferred, the defect shall be entered in the Aircraft Trouble Report, placarded as required, and signed by the authorized maintenance engineer.



2.6.2.2 Defect Discovered by Maintenance Personnel
When a defect is discovered by authorized maintenance personnel and does not seriously affect flight safety, it may be deferred and recorded accordingly.



2.6.2.3 Dispatch of an Aircraft with Deferred Items
The aircraft shall only be dispatched when all required Trouble Report entries have been made, deferred items placarded, equipment requirements met, and the Pilot-in-Command can ensure the safety of the flight.



2.7 Aircraft Weighing Procedures

In accordance with NCO.POL.105, the mass and centre of gravity of the aircraft have been established by actual weighing prior to initial entry into service.

This information can be found in the Weight Report or Fleet Masses Document.

The accumulated effects of modifications and repairs on mass and balance shall be accounted for and documented.

Reference is made to OM Annex 40 – Fleet Masses.


3. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

3.1 Emergency Procedures – Cessna C172SP – G1000

A detailed description of the emergency procedures applicable to the Cessna C172SP – G1000 can be found in the following tables.

The emergency procedures are grouped under the following categories:

ENGINE RELATED FAILURES
FIRE AND SMOKE
ICING
LANDING GEAR
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
FLIGHT INSTRUMENTS
LIGHTING
FLIGHT CONTROLS
FUEL SYSTEM
COMMUNICATION
MISCELLANEOUS

The emergency procedures described in the tables are derived from the applicable Pilot Operating Handbook (POH) and shall be applied as required.



3.2 Emergency Procedures – Diamond DA42

A detailed description of the emergency procedures applicable to the Diamond DA42 can be found in the following tables.

The emergency procedures are grouped under the following categories:

ENGINE RELATED FAILURES
FIRE AND SMOKE
ICING
LANDING GEAR
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
FLIGHT INSTRUMENTS
LIGHTING
FLIGHT CONTROLS
FUEL SYSTEM
COMMUNICATION
MISCELLANEOUS

The emergency procedures described in the tables are derived from the applicable Pilot Operating Handbook (POH) and shall be applied as required.

4. RADIO AND NAVIGATION AIDS

4.1 Cessna C172SP – G1000

4.1.1 Cockpit layout
	1.	MASTER Switch (ALT and BAT)
	2.	STBY BATT Switch
	3.	STBY BATT Test Annunciator
	4.	AVIONICS Switch (BUS 1 and BUS 2)
	5.	Primary Flight Display
	6.	Standby Airspeed Indicator
	7.	Audio Control Panel
	8.	Standby Attitude Indicator
	9.	Standby Altimeter
	10.	Multifunction Display
	11.	ELT Remote Switch / Annunciator
	12.	Flight Hour Recorder
	13.	Bendix / King KR87 ADF (not installed)
	14.	Microphone Button
	15.	Glove Box
	16.	Cabin Heat Control
	17.	Cabin Air Control
	18.	Wing Flap Control and Position Indicator
	19.	Mixture Control Knob
	20.	Handheld Microphone
	21.	Fuel Shutoff Valve
	22.	Fuel Selector Valve
	23.	12V / 10A Power Outlet
	24.	AUX Audio Input Jack
	25.	Elevator Trim Control Wheel and Position Indicator
	26.	Throttle Control Knob (with friction lock)
	27.	Go-Around Button
	28.	ALT Static Air Valve Control
	29.	Yoke Mounted Map Light
	30.	Parking Brake Handle
	31.	Circuit Breaker Panel
	32.	Electrical Switch Panel
	33.	MAGNETOS / START Switch
	34.	Dimming Panel



4.1.2 G1000 Equipment
The Cessna C172SP is equipped with a Garmin G1000 Integrated Avionics System.

The Garmin G1000 Avionics System is an integrated flight control and navigation system. The system combines primary flight instruments, communications, aircraft system information and navigational information, all displayed on two colour displays.

The G1000 system consists of the following equipment:

Two Garmin Display Units (GDU)
One Audio Panel (GMA)
Two Integrated Avionics Units (GIA), including GPS / VHF NAV and COM, ADF and DME
One Attitude and Heading Reference System (AHRS)
One Magnetometer – Flux Valve (GRS)
One Air Data Computer (GDC)
One Engine Monitor, Engine and Airframe Unit (GEA)
One Mode-S Transponder (GTX)
One Automatic Flight Control System (GFC)

Proper training is provided to all flight instructors and students with respect to the G1000 system.

A computer-based self-study course (CBT) is provided, including a familiarisation session on the G1000 trainer.



4.2 Diamond DA42

4.2.1 Cockpit layout
	1.	Electric Master Switch
	2.	Avionics Master Switch
	3.	Engine Master Switches
	4.	Start Switch
	5.	Pitot / Stall Warning Heat Switch
	6.	Alternator Switches
	7.	ECU Test Buttons
	8.	ECU Swap Switches
	9.	Rotary buttons for instrument lighting and flood light
	10.	Light Switches
	11.	Emergency Switch
	12.	Flap Selector Switch
	13.	Landing Gear Switch
	14.	Alternate Static Valve
	15.	Microphone Socket
	16.	Ventilation Nozzles
	17.	Circuit Breakers
	18.	Backup Airspeed Indicator
	19.	Backup Artificial Horizon
	20.	Backup Altimeter
	21.	Emergency Compass
	22.	ELT Control Unit
	23.	Primary Flight Display (PFD)
	24.	Audio Amplifier / Intercom / Marker Beacon Receiver
	25.	Multi-Function Display (MFD)
	26.	De-ice Control Panel
	27.	Autopilot Control Unit
	28.	Alternate Air Lever
	29.	Landing Gear Emergency Extension Lever
	30.	Oxygen Pressure Knob
	31.	Oxygen Control Knob


5. MINIMUM EQUIPMENT LIST (MEL)

EuroPilot Center does not apply operational procedures in accordance with NCO.IDE.A.105 to dispatch an aircraft with inoperative equipment through a Minimum Equipment List (MEL).

Alternatively, in accordance with Commission Regulation (EC) No. 2042/2003, M.A.403, any defect that hazards seriously the flight safety shall be rectified before further flight.

Only authorized certifying staff (maintenance engineers) may decide whether an aircraft defect hazards seriously the flight safety and therefore decide when and which rectification action shall be taken before further flight and which defect rectification can be deferred.

Any aircraft defect that would not hazard seriously the flight safety shall be rectified as soon as practicable after the date the defect was first identified and within any limits specified in the maintenance data.

Any defect not rectified before flight shall be recorded in the aircraft maintenance record system and all deferred defects shall be made known to the pilot / flight crew via the paper and electronic Trouble Report.

Deferred defects shall be transferred by maintenance onto worksheets at the next appropriate maintenance check.

Any deferred defect which is not rectified during the maintenance check shall be re-entered onto a new deferred defect record sheet.

The original date of the defect shall be retained.

The necessary components or parts needed for rectification shall be made available or ordered on a priority basis and fitted at the earliest opportunity.

Note:
As EuroPilot Center has no MEL procedure in place, the decision to defer an aircraft defect cannot be taken by the Pilot-in-Command but must be taken by an authorized maintenance engineer.
The decision to dispatch the aircraft after an item has been deferred lies with the Pilot-in-Command.



6. INSTRUMENTS, DATA AND EQUIPMENT

6.1 Airplanes

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.100, the following instruments and equipment, when required for the intended flight operations, shall be approved in accordance with the applicable airworthiness requirements if they are:

Used by the flight crew to control the flight path;
Used to comply with NCO.IDE.A.190 (radio communication equipment requirements);
Used to comply with NCO.IDE.A.195 (navigation equipment requirements);
Installed in the airplane.

The following items, when required for the intended flight operations, do not need equipment approval:

Spare fuses;
Independent portable lights;
An accurate timepiece;
First-aid kit;
Survival and signaling equipment;
Sea anchor and equipment for mooring;
Child restraint device.

Instruments and equipment not required for the intended flight operations, as well as any other equipment not required by other applicable Annexes but carried on a flight, shall comply with the following:

The information provided shall not be used by the flight crew to comply with operational communication or navigation requirements;
The equipment shall not affect the airworthiness of the airplane, even in case of failure or malfunction.

Instruments and equipment shall be readily operable or accessible from the flight crew station.

All required emergency equipment shall be easily accessible for immediate use.

6.1.1 Spare Electrical Fuses

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.110, a spare electrical fuse means a replaceable fuse in the flight crew compartment, not an automatic circuit breaker or circuit breakers in the electric compartments.

When replaceable fuses are used in the aircraft, airplanes shall be equipped with spare electrical fuses, of the ratings required for complete circuit protection, for replacement of those fuses that are allowed to be replaced in flight.



6.1.2 Operating Lights

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.115, airplanes operated at night shall be equipped with:

An anti-collision light system;
Navigation / position lights;
A landing light;
Lighting supplied from the airplane’s electrical system to provide adequate illumination for all instruments and equipment essential to the safe operation of the airplane;
Lighting supplied from the airplane’s electrical system to provide illumination in all passenger compartments;
An independent portable light for each crew member station.



6.1.3 Equipment for Operations under VFR / DAY

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.120, airplanes operated under VFR by day shall be equipped with:

Magnetic heading;
Time, in hours, minutes and seconds;
Pressure altitude;
Indicated airspeed.



6.1.4 Equipment for Operations under VFR / NIGHT

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.120, airplanes operated under VFR by night, shall in addition be equipped with a means of measuring and displaying:

Turn and slip;
Attitude;
Vertical speed;
Stabilized heading;
And a means of indicating when the supply of power to the gyroscopic instruments is not adequate.

Note:
EuroPilot Center does not allow any training operation in IMC without being under IFR (therefore the requirement of having an operative pitot heater is not applicable for VFR DAY & NIGHT).

Note:
For VFR night flights that do not exceed 60 minutes duration, that take off and land at the same aerodrome, and that remain within 50 NM of that aerodrome, an equivalent means of complying with having a Turn and Slip and an Attitude Indicator are either:

A turn and slip indicator only; or
A turn coordinator only; or
Both an Attitude Indicator and a Slip Indicator.



6.1.5 Equipment for Operations under IFR

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.125, airplanes operated under IFR shall be equipped with a means of measuring and displaying the following:

Magnetic heading;
Time in hours, minutes and seconds;
Pressure altitude;
Indicated airspeed;
Vertical speed;
Turn and slip;
Attitude;
Stabilized heading;
Outside air temperature;
A means of indicating when the supply of power to the gyroscopic instruments is not adequate; and
A means of preventing malfunction of the airspeed indicating system due to condensation or icing.

Note:
A means of measuring and displaying the time in hours, minutes and seconds may be a wrist watch capable of the same functions.

Note:
Individual equipment requirements may be met by combinations of instruments, by integrated flight systems or by a combination of parameters on electronic displays. The information so available to each required pilot should not be less than that required in the applicable operational requirements, and the equivalent safety of the installation should be approved during type certification of the airplane for the intended type of operation.

Note:
The means of measuring and indicating turn and slip, airplane attitude and stabilized airplane heading may be met by combinations of instruments or by integrated flight director systems, provided that the safeguards against total failure, inherent in the three separate instruments, are retained.


6.1.6 Terrain Awareness System (TAWS)

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.130, a Terrain Awareness System is not applicable for training operations within EuroPilot Center.



6.1.7 Flight Crew Interphone (Intercom) System

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.135, during flight training operations with students, two flight crew members are required; consequently a flight crew interphone (Intercom) system, including headsets and microphones for use by all flight crew members shall be installed and must be operational.

Note 1:
The flight crew interphone system should not be of a handheld type.

Note 2:
Headset boom microphones should be of the noise cancelling type.

Note 3:
If the intention is to utilize noise cancelling earphones, the pilot-in-command should ensure that the earphones do not attenuate any aural warnings or sounds necessary for alerting the flight crew on matters related to the safe operation of the airplane.



6.1.8 Seats, Seat Safety Belts, Restraint Systems and Child Restraint Devices

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.140, airplanes shall be equipped with:

A seat or berth for each person on board who is aged 24 months or more;
A seat belt on each passenger seat and restraining belts for each berth;
A child restraint device (CRD) for each person on board younger than 24 months; and
A seat belt with upper torso restraint system on each flight crew seat, having a single point release for airplanes having a Certificate of Airworthiness first issued on or after 25 August 2016.

Note:
It is EuroPilot Center’s policy not to take any passengers at an age younger than 24 months unless with special authorization from the Head of Training.



6.1.9 First-Aid Kit

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.145, all airplanes shall be equipped with a first-aid kit:

Readily accessible for use;
Kept up-to-date;
Located inside the airplane cabin and indicated by a recognizable sign.

The location shall be briefed to all occupants of the airplane before the flight.

The contents of the First Aid Kits will be supplemented, based on the Internal Risk Assessment covering the entire scope of EuroPilot Center’s Training Operation, as follows:

Appropriate medication, limited to: Anti-diarrhea, Anti-nausea, an Antihistamine (Diphenhydramine), Hydrocortisone cream, Pain Relievers (Paracetamol / Ibuprofen);
Bandages (assorted sizes, including a triangular bandage);
Burns dressings (large and small);
Wound dressings (large and small);
Adhesive dressings (assorted sizes);
Antiseptic wound cleaner;
Safety scissors;
Disposable gloves;
Disposable resuscitation aid;
Surgical masks.

To be kept up-to-date, the first-aid kit should be:

Inspected periodically to confirm that contents are maintained in proper condition;
Replenished at regular intervals, in accordance with instructions contained on their labels, or as circumstances warrant;
Replenished after use in-flight at the first opportunity where replacement items are available.

IMPORTANT:
Nothing of the medication listed above shall be advised nor administered by any staff member of EuroPilot Center. It is the responsibility of EuroPilot Center staff members to inform occupants of the airplane about the availability of these medications. The responsibility and decision whether or not to take any of these medications rests solely with the occupant, preferably advised by a Licensed Medical Practitioner.



6.1.10 Supplemental Oxygen

In accordance with NCO.OP.190, the pilot-in-command shall ensure that all flight crew members engaged in performing duties essential to the safe operation of an aircraft in flight use supplemental oxygen continuously whenever he/she determines that at the altitude of the intended flight the lack of oxygen might result in impairment of the faculties of crew members, and shall ensure that supplemental oxygen is available to passengers when lack of oxygen might harmfully affect passengers.

In any other case when the pilot-in-command cannot determine how the lack of oxygen might affect all occupants on board, he/she shall ensure that:

All crew members engaged in performing duties essential to the safe operation of an aircraft in flight use supplemental oxygen for any period in excess of 30 minutes when the pressure altitude in the passenger compartment will be between 10,000 ft and 13,000 ft; and
All occupants use supplemental oxygen for any period that the pressure altitude in the passenger compartment will be above 13,000 ft.

6.1.10.1 Pressurized airplanes
No pressurized airplanes are operated at EuroPilot Center, consequently NCO.IDE.A.150 is not applicable.

6.1.10.2 Non-pressurized airplanes
In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.155, non-pressurized airplanes operated when an oxygen supply is required shall be equipped with oxygen storage and dispensing apparatus capable of storing and dispensing the required oxygen supplies.



6.1.11 Hand Fire Extinguishers

Airplanes shall be equipped with at least one hand fire extinguisher:

In the flight crew compartment; and
In each passenger compartment that is separate from the flight crew compartment, except if the compartment is readily accessible to the flight crew.

The type and quantity of extinguishing agent for the required fire extinguishers shall be suitable for the type of fire likely to occur in the compartment where the extinguisher is intended to be used and to minimise the hazard of toxic gas concentration in compartments occupied by persons.



6.1.12 Marking of Break-In Points

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.165, marking of break-in points is not applicable for any airplane at EuroPilot Center.



6.1.13 Emergency Locator Transmitters (ELT)

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.170, airplanes shall be equipped with:

An ELT of any type, when first issued with an individual Certificate of Airworthiness on or before 1 July 2008;
An automatic ELT, when first issued with an individual Certificate of Airworthiness after 1 July 2008; or
A survival ELT (ELT(S)) or a personal locator beacon (PLB), carried by a crew member or a passenger, when certified for a maximum passenger seating configuration of six or less.

Note:
ELTs of any type and PLBs shall be capable of transmitting simultaneously on 121.5 MHz and 406 MHz.

Note:
All batteries used in ELTs or PLBs should be replaced (or recharged, if the battery is rechargeable) when the equipment has been in use for more than one cumulative hour or in the following cases:

With EASA Form 1, replaced or recharged before the end of their useful life in accordance with the maintenance instructions;
With no EASA Form 1, replaced or recharged when 50 percent of their useful life (or for rechargeable batteries, 50 percent of their useful life of charge) has expired;
In PLBs, replaced or recharged when 50 percent of their useful life (or for rechargeable batteries, 50 percent of their useful life of charge) has expired;
Not applicable to batteries unaffected during probable storage intervals.

Note:
The new expiry date for a replaced or recharged battery should be legibly marked on the outside of the equipment.



6.1.14 Flight over Water

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.175, the airplane shall be equipped with a life-jacket for each person on board (or equivalent individual flotation device) for each person on board younger than 24 months, that shall be worn or stowed in a position that is readily accessible from the seat or berth of the person for whose use it is provided:

When operating the Cessna C172SP over water beyond gliding distance from land; or taking off or landing at an aerodrome or operating site where, in the opinion of the pilot-in-command, the take-off or approach path is so disposed over water that there would be a likelihood of a ditching;
When operating the Cessna C172SP or Diamond DA42 at a distance away from land where an emergency landing is possible greater than that corresponding to 30 minutes at normal cruising speed or 50 NM, whichever is less.

The pilot-in-command of an airplane operated at a distance away from land where an emergency landing is possible greater than that corresponding to 30 minutes at normal cruising speed or 50 NM, whichever is the lesser, shall determine the risks to survival of the occupants of the airplane in the event of a ditching, based on which he/she shall determine the carriage of:

Equipment for making the distress signals;
Life-rafts in sufficient numbers to carry all persons on board, stowed so as to facilitate their ready use in emergency; and
Life-saving equipment, to provide the means of sustaining life, as appropriate to the flight to be undertaken.



6.1.15 Survival Equipment

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.180, when operating an airplane over areas in which search and rescue would be especially difficult, the airplane shall be equipped with such signaling devices and life-saving equipment, including means of sustaining life, as may be appropriate to the area overflown.



6.1.16 Radio Communication Equipment

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.190, airplanes shall be equipped with radio communication equipment capable of conducting two-way communication with those aeronautical stations and on those frequencies to meet airspace requirements.

Radio communication equipment shall provide for communication on the aeronautical emergency frequency 121.5 MHz.

When more than one communication equipment unit is required, each shall be independent of the other or others to the extent that a failure in any one will not result in failure of any other.



6.1.17 Navigation Equipment

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.195, when the airplane is intended to be operated over routes that cannot be navigated by reference to visual landmarks, it shall be equipped with any navigation equipment necessary to enable it to proceed in accordance with:

The ATS flight plan, if applicable; and
The applicable airspace requirements.

The airplane shall have sufficient navigation equipment to ensure that, in the event of the failure of one item of equipment at any stage of the flight, the remaining equipment shall allow safe navigation, or an appropriate contingency action, to be completed safely.

When the airplane is intended to land in IMC, it shall be equipped with suitable equipment capable of providing guidance to a point from which a visual landing can be performed.

For Performance Based Navigation (PBN) operations, the airplane shall meet the airworthiness certification requirements for the appropriate navigation specification.



6.1.18 Transponder

In accordance with NCO.IDE.A.200, the airplane shall be equipped with a secondary surveillance radar (SSR) transponder with all the required capabilities, where required by the airspace being flown.


