SOURCE: Easy Access Rules for Aircrew (Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011) - Nov 2025
EXTRACT: Part-ORA - ORA.GEN (printed pages 1730-1764) and ORA.ATO (printed pages 1765-1805)


### ORA.GEN (1730-1764)


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1730 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1731  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
ORA.GEN.120 Means of compliance  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) Alternative means of compliance to the AMC adopted by the Agency may be used by an 
organisation to establish compliance with Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 and its Implementing 
Rules.  
(b) When an organisation wishes to use an alternative means of compliance, it shall, prior to 
implementing it, provide the competent authority with a full description of the alternative 
means of compliance. The description shall include any revisions to manua ls or procedures that 
may be relevant, as well as an assessment demonstrating that Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 and 
its Implementing Rules are met.  
The organisation may implement these alternative means of compliance subject to prior 
approval by the competent authority and upon receipt of the notification as prescribed in 
ARA.GEN.120(d).  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.120(a) Means of compliance  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
DEMONSTRATION OF COMPLIANCE  
In order to demonstrate that the Implementing Rules are met, a risk assessment should be completed 
and documented. The result of this risk assessment should demonstrate that an equivalent level of 
safety to that established by the Acceptable Means of Compl iance (AMC) adopted by the Agency  is 
reached.  
ORA.GEN.125 Terms of approval and privileges of an organisation  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
A certified organisation shall comply with the scope and privileges defined in the terms of approval 
attached to the organisation’s certificate.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.125 Terms of approval and privileges of an 
organisation  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  
The management system documentation should contain the privileges and detailed scope of activities 
for which the organisation is certified, as relevant to the applicable requirements. The scope of 
activities defined in the management system documentation should be consiste nt with the terms of 
approval.  
ORA.GEN.130 Changes to organisations  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) Any change affecting:  
(1) the scope of the certificate or the terms of approval of an organisation; or  
(2) any of the elements of the organisation’s management system as required in 
ORA.GEN.200(a)(1) and (a)(2) ,  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1731 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1732  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
shall require prior approval by the competent authority.  
(b) For any changes requiring prior approval in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 and 
its Implementing Rules, the organisation shall apply for and obtain an approval issued by the 
competent authority. The application shall be submitted before any su ch change takes place, in 
order to enable the competent authority to determine continued compliance with Regulation 
(EC) No 216/2008 and its Implementing Rules and to amend, if necessary, the organisation 
certificate and related terms of approval attach ed to it.  
The organisation shall provide the competent authority with any relevant documentation.  
The change shall only be implemented upon receipt of formal approval by the competent 
authority in accordance with ARA.GEN.330.  
The organisation shall operate under the conditions prescribed by the competent authority 
during such changes, as applicable.  
(c) All changes not requiring prior approval shall be managed and notified to the competent 
authority as defined in the procedure approved by the competent authority in accordance with 
ARA.GEN.310(c).  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.130 Changes to organisations  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
APPLICATION TIME FRAMES  
(a) The application for the amendment of an organisation certificate should be submitted at least 
30 days before the date of the intended changes.  
(b) In the case of a planned change of a nominated person, the organisation should inform the 
competent authority at least 10 days before the date of the proposed change.  
(c) Unforeseen changes should be notified at the earliest opportunity, in order to enable the 
competent authority to determine continued compliance with the applicable requirements and 
to amend, if necessary, the organisation certificate  and related terms of approval.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.130(a) Changes to organisations  
ED Decision 2017/022 /R 
GENERAL  
(a) Typical examples of changes requiring prior approval which  may affect the certificate or the 
terms of approval are listed below:  
(1) the name of the organisation;  
(2) the organisation’s principal place of business;  
(3) the organisation’s scope of activities;  
(4) additional locations of the organisation;  
(5) the accountable manager;  
(6) any of the persons referred to in ORA.GEN.210(a) and (b) ;  
(7) the organisation’s documentation as required by this Part, safety policy and procedures;   
(8) the facilities.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1732 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1733  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) Prior approval by the competent authority is required for any changes to the organisation’s 
procedure describing how changes not requiring prior approval will be managed and notified to 
the competent authority.  
(c) Changes requiring prior approval may only be implemented upon receipt of formal approval by 
the competent authority.  
GM2 ORA.GEN.130(a) Changes to organisations  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
CHANGE OF NAME OF THE ORGANISATION  
A change of name requires the organisation to submit a new application as a matter of urgency.  
Where this is the only change to report, the new application can be accompanied by a copy of the 
documentation previously submitted to the competent authority under the previous name, as a 
means of demonstrating how the organisation complies with the appli cable requirements . 
GM1  ORA.GEN.130(c)  Changes to organisations
ED Decision 2017/022 /R 
Typical examples of changes not requiring prior approval are to the following items:  
(a) medical equipment (e.g. electrocardiograph (ECG), ophthalmoscope);  
(b) flight simulation training device (FSTD) operator’s technical personnel;  
(c) change in schedule of preventive maintenance; and  
(d) list of instructors.  
It is recommended that all information on changes not requiring prior approval be included as annexes 
to the approved training organisation (ATO)’s, FSTD operator’s, as well as aeromedical centre’s 
documentation  
ORA.GEN.135 Continued validity  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The organisation’s certificate shall remain valid subject to:  
(1) the organisation remaining in compliance with the relevant requirements of Regulation 
(EC) No 216/2008 and its Implementing Rules, taking into account the provisions related 
to the handling of findings as specified under ORA.GEN.150 ; 
(2) the competent authority being granted access to the organisation as defined in 
ORA.GEN.140  to determine continued compliance with the relevant requirements of 
Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 and its Implementing Rules; and  
(3) the certificate not being surrendered or revoked.  
(b) Upon revocation or surrender the certificate shall be returned to the competent authority 
without delay.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1733 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1734  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
ORA.GEN.140 Access  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
For the purpose of determining compliance with the relevant requirements of Regulation (EC) No 
216/ 2008  and its Implementing Rules, the organisation shall grant access to any facility, aircraft, 
document, records, data, procedures or any other material relevant to its activity subject to 
certification, whether it is contracted or not, to any person authoris ed by:  
(a) the competent authority defined in ORA.GEN.105 ; or 
(b) the authority acting under the provisions of ARA.GEN.300(d), ARA.GEN.300(e) or ARO.RAMP.  
ORA.GEN.150 Findings  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
After receipt of notification of findings , the organisation shall:  
(a) identify the root cause of the non -compliance;  
(b) define a corrective action plan; and  
(c) demonstrate corrective action implementation to the satisfaction of the competent authority 
within a period agreed with that authority as defined in ARA.GEN.350(d).  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.150(b) Findings  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
GENERAL  
The corrective action plan defined by the organisation should address the effects of the non -
conformity , as well as its root -cause.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.150 Findings  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
GENERAL  
(a) Corrective action is the action to eliminate or mitigate the root cause(s) and prevent recurrence 
of an existing detected non -compliance or other undesirable condition or situation.  
(b) Proper determination of the root cause is crucial for defining effective corrective actions.  
ORA.GEN.155 Immediate reaction to a safety  problem  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
The organisation shall implement:  
(a) any safety measures mandated by the competent authority in accordance with ARA.GEN.135(c); 
and 
(b) any relevant mandatory safety information issued by the Agency, including airworthiness 
directives.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1734 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1735  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
ORA.GEN.160 Occurrence reporting  
Regulation (EU) No 70/2014  
(a) As part of its management system, the organisation shall establish and maintain an 
occurrence -reporting system, including mandatory and voluntary reporting. For organisations 
having their principal place of business in a Member State, that system shall meet the 
requirements of Regulation (EU) No  376/2014  and Regulation (EU) 2018/1139  as well as the 
delegated and implementing acts adopted on the basis of those Regulations.  
(b) The organisation shall report to the competent authority and, in case of aircraft not registered 
in a Member State, the State of Registry any safety -related event or condition that endangers 
or, if not corrected or addressed, could endanger an aircraft, it s occupants or any other person, 
and in particular any accident or serious incident.  
(c) Without prejudice to point (b), the organisation shall report to the competent authority and the 
design approval holder of the aircraft any incident, malfunction, technical defect, exceeding of 
technical limitations, occurrence that would highlight inaccur ate, incomplete or ambiguous 
information, contained in data established in accordance with Regulation (EU) No  748/2012 , or 
other irregular circumstance that has or may have endangered an aircraft, its occupants or any 
other person and has not resulted in an accident or serious incident.  
(d) Without prejudice to Regulation (EU) No  376/2014  and the delegated and implementing acts 
adopted on the basis thereof, reports in accordance with point (c) shall:  
(1) be made as soon as practicable, but in any case no later than 72 hours after the 
organisation has identified the event or condition to which the report relates unless 
exceptional circumstances prevent this;  
(2) be made in a form and manner established by the competent authority, as defined in 
point ORA.GEN.105 ; 
(3) contain all pertinent information about the condition known to the organisation.  
(e) For organisations not having their principal place of business in a Member State:  
(1) initial mandatory reports shall:  
(i) appropriately safeguard the confidentiality of the identity of the reporter and of 
the persons mentioned in the report;  
(ii) be made as soon as practicable, but in any case, no later than 72 hours after the 
organisation has become aware of the occurrence unless exceptional 
circumstances prevent this;  
(iii) be made in a form and manner established by the Agency;  
(iv) contain all pertinent information about the condition known to the organisation;  
(2) where relevant, a follow -up report providing details of actions the organisation intends 
to take to prevent similar occurrences in the future shall be made as soon as those actions 
have been identified; those follow -up reports shall:  
(i) be sent to relevant entities initially reported to in accordance with points (b) and 
(c); 
(ii) be made in a form and manner established by the Agency.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1735 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1736  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
AMC1 ORA.GEN.160 Occurrence reporting  system  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
GENERAL  
In addition to occurrence reporting in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 376/2014 t he organization  
should report all occurrences defined in AMC 20 -8.


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1736 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1737  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
SECTION  II – MANAGEMENT  
ORA.GEN.200 Management system  
Regulation (EU) 2020/2193  
(a) The organisation shall establish, implement and maintain a management system that includes:  
(1) clearly defined lines of responsibility and accountability throughout the organisation, 
including a direct safety accountability of the accountable manager;  
(2) a description of the overall philosophies and principles of the organisation  with regard to 
safety, referred to as the safety policy;  
(3) the identification of aviation safety hazards entailed by the activities of the organisation, 
their evaluation and the management of associated risks, including taking actions to 
mitigate the risk and verify their effectiveness;  
(4) maintaining personnel trained and competent to perform their tasks;  
(5) documentation of all management system key processes, including a process for making 
personnel aware of their responsibilities and the procedure for amending this 
documentation;  
(6) a function to monitor compliance of the organisation with the relevant requirements. 
Compliance monitoring shall include a feedback system of findings to the accountable 
manager to ensure effective implementation of corrective actions as necessary; and  
(7)  any additional relevant requirements prescribed in Regulation (EU) 2018/1139  and in 
Regulation (EU) No  376/2014  as well as in the delegated and implementing acts adopted 
on the basis thereof.  
(b) The management system shall correspond to the size of the organisation and the nature and 
complexity of its activities, taking into account the hazards and associated risks inherent in these 
activities.  
(c) Notwithstanding point (a), in an organisation providing training only for the LAPL, PPL, SPL or 
BPL and the associated ratings or certificates, safety risk management and compliance 
monitoring defined in points (a)(3) and (a)(6) may be accomplished by an o rganisational review, 
to be performed at least once every calendar year. The competent authority shall be notified 
about the results of this review by the organisation without undue delay.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(1);(2);(3);(5) Management system   
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
NON -COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - GENERAL  
(a) Safety risk management may be performed using hazard checklists or similar risk management 
tools or processes, which are integrated into the activities of the organisation.  
(b) The organisation should manage safety risks related to a change. The management of change 
should be a documented process to identify external and internal change that may have an 
adverse effect on safety. It should make use of the organisation’s existing h azard identification, 
risk assessment and mitigation processes.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1737 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1738  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(c) The organisation should identify a person who fulfils the role of safety manager and who is 
responsible for coordinating the safety management system. This person may be the 
accountable manager or a person with an operational role in the organisation.  
(d) Within the organisation, responsibilities should be identified for hazard identification, risk 
assessment and mitigation.  
(e) The safety policy should include a commitment to improve towards the highest safety 
standards, comply with all applicable legal requirements, meet all applicable standards, 
consider best practices and provide appropriate resources.  
(f) The organisation should, in cooperation with other stakeholders, develop, coordinate and 
maintain an emergency response plan (ERP) that ensures orderly and safe transition from 
normal to emergency operations and return to normal operations. The ERP should provide the 
actions to be taken by the organisation or specified individuals in an emergency and reflect the 
size, nature and complexity of the activities p erformed by the organisation.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(1) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - ORGANISATION AND ACCOUNTABILITIES  
The management system of an organisation should encompass safety by including a safety manager 
and a safety review board in the organisational structure.  
(a) Safety manager  
(1) The safety manager should act as the focal point and be responsible for the development, 
administration and maintenance of an effective safety management system.  
(2) The functions of the safety manager should be to:  
(i) facilitate hazard identification, risk analysis and management;  
(ii) monitor the implementation of actions taken to mitigate risks, as listed in the 
safety action plan;  
(iii) provide periodic reports on safety performance;  
(iv) ensure maintenance of safety management documentation;  
(v) ensure that there is safety management training available and that it meets 
acceptable standards;  
(vi) provide advice on safety matters; and  
(vii) ensure initiation and follow -up of internal occurrence / accident investigations.  
(b) Safety review board  
(1) The Safety review board should be a high level committee that considers matters of 
strategic safety in support of the accountable manager’s safety accountability.  
(2) The board should be chaired by the accountable manager and be composed of heads of 
functional areas.  
(3) The safety review board should monitor:  
(i) safety performance against the safety policy and objectives;  
(ii) that any safety action is taken in a timely manner; and   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1738 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1739  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(iii) the effectiveness of the organisation’s safety management processes.  
(c) The safety review board should ensure that appropriate resources are allocated to achieve the 
established safety performance.  
(d) The safety manager or any other relevant person may attend, as appropriate, safety review 
board meetings. He/she may communicate to the accountable manager all information, as 
necessary, to allow decision making based on safety data.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(1) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
SAFETY MANAGER  
(a) Depending on the size of the organisation and the nature and complexity of its activities, the 
safety manager may be assisted by additional safety personnel for the performance of all sa fety 
management related tasks.  
(b) Regardless of the organisational set -up it is important that the safety manager remains the 
unique focal point as regards the development, administration and maintenance of the 
organisati on’s safety management system.  
GM2 ORA.GEN.200(a)(1) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - SAFETY ACTION GROUP  
(a) A safety action group may be established as a standing group or as an ad -hoc group to assist or 
act on behalf of the safety review board.  
(b) More than one safety action group may be established depending on the scope of the task and 
specific expertise required.  
(c) The safety action group should report to and take strategic direction from the safety review 
board and should be comprised of managers, supervisors and personnel from operational areas.  
(d) The safety action group should:  
(1) monitor operational safety;  
(2) resolve identified risks;  
(3) assess the impact on safety of operational changes; and  
(4) ensure that safety actions are implemented within agreed timescales.  
(e) The safety action group should review the effectiveness of previous safety recommendations 
and safety promotion.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(2) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - SAFETY POLICY  
(a) The safety policy should:  
(1) be endorsed by the accountable manager;  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1739 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1740  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(2) reflect organisational commitments regarding safety and its proactive and systematic 
management;  
(3) be communicated, with visible endorsement, throughout the organisation; and  
(4) includ e safety reporting principles.  
(b) The safety policy should include a commitment:  
(1) to improve towards the highest safety standards;  
(2) to comply with all applicable legislation, meet all applicable standards and consider best 
practices;  
(3) to provide appropriate resources;   
(4) to enforce safety as one primary responsibility of all managers; and  
(5) not to blame someone for reporting something which would not have been otherwise 
detected.  
(c) Senior management should:  
(1) continually promote the safety policy to all personnel and demonstrate their 
commitment to it;  
(2) provide necessary human and financial resources for its implementation; and  
(3) establish safety objectives and performance standards.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(2) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
SAFETY POLICY  
The safety policy is the means whereby the organisation states its intention to maintain and, where 
practicable, improve safety levels in all its activities and to minimise its contribution to the risk of an 
aircraft accident as far as is reasonably practi cable.  
The safety policy should state that the purpose of safety reporting and internal investigations is to 
improve safety, not to apportion blame to individuals.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(3) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - SAFETY RISK MANAGEMENT  
(a) Hazard identification processes  
(1) Reactive and proactive schemes for hazard identification should be the formal means of 
collecting, recording, analysing, acting on and generating feedback about hazards and the 
associated risks that affect the safety of the operational activities of the or ganisation.  
(2) All reporting systems, including confidential reporting schemes, should include an 
effective feedback process.  
(b) Risk assessment and mitigation processes  
(1) A formal risk management process should be developed and maintained that ensures 
analysis (in terms of likelihood and severity of occurrence), assessment (in terms of 
tolerability) and control (in terms of mitigation) of risks to an acceptable level.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1740 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1741  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(2) The levels of management who have the authority to make decisions regarding the 
tolerability of safety risks, in accordance with (b)(1), should be specified.  
(c) Internal safety investigation  
(1) The scope of internal safety investigations should extend beyond the scope of 
occurrences required to be reported to the competent authority.  
(d) Safety performance monitoring and measurement  
(1) Safety performance monitoring and measurement should be the process by which the 
safety performance of the organisation is verified in comparison to the safety policy and 
objectives.  
(2) This process should include:  
(i) safety reporting;  
(ii) safety studies, that is, rather large analyses encompassing broad safety concerns;  
(iii) safety reviews including trends reviews, which would be conducted during 
introduction and deployment of new technologies, change or implementation of 
procedures, or in situations of structural change in operations;  
(iv) safety audits focussing on the integrity of the organisation’s management system, 
and periodically assessing the status of safety risk controls; and  
(v) safety surveys, examining particular elements or procedures of a specific 
operation, such as problem areas or bottlenecks in daily operations, perceptions 
and opinions of operational personnel and areas of dissent or confusion.  
(e) The management of change  
The organisation should manage safety risks related to a change. The management of change 
should be a documented process to identify external and internal change that may have an 
adverse effect on safety. It should make use of the organisation’s existing h azard identification, 
risk assessment and mitigation processes.  
(f) Continuous improvement  
The organisation should continuously seek to improve its safety performance. Continuous 
improvement should be achieved through:  
(1) proactive and reactive evaluations of facilities, equipment, documentation and 
procedures through safety audits and surveys;  
(2) proactive evaluation of individuals’ performance to verify the fulfilment of their safety 
responsibilities; and  
(3) reactive evaluations in order to verify the effectiveness of the system for control and 
mitigation of risk.  
(g) The emergency response plan (ERP)  
(1) An ERP should be established that provides the actions to be taken by the organisation 
or specified individuals in an emergency. The ERP should reflect the size, nature and 
complexity of the activities performed by the organisation.  
(2) The ERP should ensure:  
(i) an orderly and safe transition from normal to emergency operations;  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1741 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1742  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(ii) safe continuation of operations or return to normal operations as soon as 
practicable; and  
(iii) coordination with the emergency response plans of other organisations, where 
appropriate.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(3) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
INTERNAL OCCURRENCE REPORTING SCHEME  
(a) The overall purpose of the scheme is to use reported information to improve the level of safety 
performance of the organisation and not to attribute blame.  
(b) The objectives of the scheme are to:  
(1) enable an assessment to be made of the safety implications of each relevant incident and 
accident, including previous similar occurrences, so that any necessary action can be 
initiated; and  
(2) ensure that knowledge of relevant incidents and accidents is disseminated, so that other 
persons and organisations may learn from them.  
(c) The scheme is an essential part of the overall monitoring function and it is complementary to 
the normal day -to-day procedures and ‘control’ systems and is not intended to duplicate or 
supersede any of them. The scheme is a tool to identify those instances  where routine 
procedures have failed.  
(d) All occurrence reports judged reportable by the person submitting the report should be 
retained as the significance of such reports may only become obvious at a later date.  
GM3 ORA.GEN.200(a)(3) Management system  
ED Decision 2013/008/R  
APPROVED TRAINING ORGANISATIONS - RISK MANAGEMENT OF FLIGHT OPERATIONS WITH KNOWN OR 
FOREC AST VOLCANIC ASH CONTAMINATION  
(a) Responsibilities  
The ATO is responsible for the safety of its operations, including within an area with known or 
forecast volcani c ash contamination.  
The ATO should complete this assessment of safety risks related to known or forecast volcanic 
ash contamination as part of its management system before initiating operations into airspace 
forecast to be or aerodromes/operating sites known to be contaminate d with volcanic ash.   
This process is intended to ensure the ATO takes into account the likely accuracy and quality of 
the information sources it uses in its management system and to demonstrate its own 
competence and capability to interpret data from different sources in order  to achieve the 
necessary level of data integrity reliably and correctly resolve any conflicts among data sources 
that may arise.   
In order to decide whether or not to operate into airspace forecast to be or 
aerodromes/operating sites known to be contaminated with volcanic ash, the ATO should make 
use of the safety risk assessment within its management system as required by ORA.GEN.200 . 
The ATO’s safety risk assessment should take into account all relevant data including data from 
the type certificate holders (TCHs) regarding the susceptibility of the aircraft they operate to 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1742 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1743  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
volcanic cloud -related airworthiness effects, the nature and severity of these effects and the 
related pre -flight, in -flight and post -flight precauti ons to be observed by the ATO.  
The ATO should ensure that personnel required to be familiar with the details of the safety risk 
assessments receives all relevant information (both pre -flight and in -flight) in order to be in a 
position to apply appropriate mitigation measures as specifie d by the safety risk assessments.  
(b) Procedures  
The ATO should have documented procedures for the management of operations into airspace 
forecast to be or aerodromes/operating sites known to be c ontaminated with volcanic ash.  
These procedures should ensure that, at all times, flight operations remain within the accepted 
safety boundaries as established through the management system allowing for any variations 
in information sources, equipment, operational experience or organisa tion. Procedures should 
include those for flight crew and any other relevant personnel such that they are in a position 
to evaluate correctly the risk of flights into airspace forecast to be contaminated by volcanic ash 
and to plan accordingly.  
Continuing airworthiness personnel should be provided with procedures allowing them to 
correctly assess the need for and to execute relevant maintenance or continuing airworthiness 
interventions.  
The ATO should retain sufficient qualified and competent staff to generate well supported 
operational risk management decisions and ensure that its staff are appropriately trained and 
current. It is recommended that the ATO make the necessary arrangements for its relevant staff 
to take up opportunities to be involved in volcanic ash exercises conducte d in their areas of 
operation.  
(c) Volcanic activity information and the ATO’s potential response  
Before and during operations, information valuable to the ATO is generated by various volcano 
agencies worldwide. The ATO’s risk assessment and mitigating actions need to take account of 
and respond appropriately to the information likely to be available d uring each phase of the 
eruptive sequence from pre -eruption through to end of eruptive activity. It is nevertheless 
noted that eruptions rarely follow a deterministic pattern of behaviour. A typical ATO’s 
response  may consist of the following:  
(1) Pre-eruption  
The ATO should have in place a robust mechanism for ensuring that it is constantly 
vigilant for any alerts of pre -eruption volcanic activity relevant to its operations. The staff 
involved need to understand the threat to safe operations that such alerts re present.  
An ATO whose areas of activity include large, active volcanic areas for which immediate 
International Airways Volcano Watch (IAVW) alerts may not be available, should define 
its strategy for capturing information about increased volcanic activity before pr e-
eruption alerts are generated. For example, an ATO may combine elevated activity 
information with information concerning the profile and history of the volcano to 
determine an operating policy, which could include re -routing or restrictions at night. Thi s 
would be useful when dealing with the 60% of volcanoes which are unmonitored.  
Such an ATO should also ensure that its crews are aware that they may be the first to 
observe an eruption and so need to be vigilant and ready to ensure that this information 
is made available for wider dissemination as quickly as possible.  
(2) Start of an eruption  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1743 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1744  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Given the likely uncertainty regarding the status of the eruption during the early stages 
of an event and regarding the associated volcanic cloud, the ATO’s procedures should 
include a requirement for crews to initiate re -routes to avoid the affected airsp ace. 
The ATO should ensure that flights are planned to remain clear of the affected areas and 
that consideration is given to available aerodromes/operating sites and fuel 
requirements.  
It is expected that the following initial act ions will be taken by the ATO:  
(i) determine if any aircraft in flight could be affected, alert the crew and provide 
advice on re -routing as required;   
(ii) alert management;  
(iii) for flight departures, brief flight crew and revise flight and fuel planning in 
accordance wi th the safety risk assessment;  
(iv) alert flight crew to the need for increased monitoring of information (e.g. special 
air report (AIREP), volcanic activity report (VAR), significant weather information 
(SIGMET),  NOTAMs and company messages);  
(v) initiate the gathering of all data relevant to determining the risk; and   
(vi) apply mitigations identified in the safety risk assessment.   
(3) On-going eruption  
As the eruptive event develops, the ATO can expect the responsible Volcanic Ash Advisory 
Centre (VAAC) to provide volcanic ash advisory messages (VAA/VAGs) defining, as 
accurately as possible, the vertical and horizontal extent of areas and layers of volca nic 
clouds. As a minimum, the ATO should monitor, and take account of, this VAAC 
information as well as of relevant SIGMETs and NOTAMs.  
Other sources of information are likely to be available such as VAR/AIREPs, satellite 
imagery and a range of other information from State and commercial organisations. The 
ATO should plan its operations in accordance with its safety risk assessment taking into 
account the information that it considers accurate and relevant from these additional 
sources.  
The ATO should carefully consider and resolve differences or conflicts among the 
information sources, notably between published information and observations (pilot 
reports, airborne measurements, etc.).  
Given the dynamic nature of the volcanic hazards, the ATO should ensure that the 
situation is monitored closely and operations adjusted to suit changing conditions.  
The ATO should be aware that, depending on the State concerned the affected or danger 
areas may be established and presented in a different way than the one currently used 
in Europe as described in EUR Doc 019 -NAT Doc 006.  
The ATO should require reports from its crews concerning any encounters with volcanic 
emissions. These reports should be passed immediately to the appropriate air traffic 
services (ATS) unit and to the ATO’s competent authority.  
For the purpose of flight planning, the ATO should treat the horizontal and vertical limits 
of the temporary danger area (TDA) or airspace forecast to be contaminated by volcanic 
ash as applicable, to be over -flown as it would mountainous terrain, modified  in 
accordance with its safety risk assessment. The ATO should take account of the risk of 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1744 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1745  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
cabin depressurisation or engine failure resulting in the inability to maintain level flight 
above a volcanic cloud. Additional minimum Equipment List (MEL) provisions, if 
applicable, should be considered in consultation with the TCHs.  
Flying below a volcanic ash contaminated airspace should be considered on a case by case 
basis. It should only be planned to reach or leave an aerodrome/operating site close to 
the boundary of this airspace or where the ash contamination is very high and s table. The 
establishment of Minimum Sector Altitude  (MSA) and the availability of 
aerodromes/operati ng sites should be considered.  
(d) Safety risk assessment  
When directed specifically at the issue of intended flight into airspace forecast to be or 
aerodromes/operating sites known to be contaminated with volcanic ash, the process should 
involve the following:   
(1) Identifying the hazards  
The generic hazard, in the context of this document, is airspace forecast to beor 
aerodromes/operating sites known to be contaminated with volcanic ash, and whose 
characteristics are harmful to the airworthiness and operation of the aircraft.  
This GM is referring to volcanic ash contamination since it is the most significant hazard 
for flight operations in the context of a volcanic eruption. Nevertheless, it might not be 
the only hazard and therefore the operator should consider additional haza rds which 
could have an adverse effect on aircraft structure or passengers safety such as gases.  
Within this generic hazard, the ATO should develop its own list of specific hazards taking 
into account its specific aircraft, experience, knowledge and type of operation, and any 
other relevant data ste mming from previous eruptions.  
(2) Considering the severity and consequences of the hazard occurring (i.e. the nature and 
actual level of damage expected to be inflicted on the particular aircraft from exposure 
to that volcani c ash cloud).  
(3) Evaluating the likelihood of encountering volcanic ash clouds with characteristics harmful 
to the safe operation of the aircraft.  
For each specific hazard within the generic hazard, the likelihood of adverse 
consequences should be assessed, either qualitatively or quantitatively.   
(4) Determining whether the consequent risk is acceptable and within the ATO’s risk 
performance criteria.  
At this stage of the process, the safety risks should be classified as acceptable or 
unacceptable. The assessment of tolerability will be subjective, based on qualitative data 
and expert judgement, until specific quantitative data are available in respect of a range 
of parameters.  
(5) Taking action to reduce the safety risk to a level that is acceptable to the ATO’s 
management.  
Appropriate mitigation for each unacceptable risk identified should then be considered 
in order to reduce the risk to a level acceptable to the ATO’s management.   
(e) Procedures to be considered when identifying possible mitigations actions  
When conducting a volcanic ash safety risk assessment, the ATO should consider the following 
non-exhaustive list of procedures and processes as mitigation:   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1745 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1746  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) Type certificate holders  
Obtaining advice from the TCHs and other engineering sources concerning operations in 
potentially contaminated airspace and/or aerodromes/operating sites contaminated by 
volcanic ash.  
This advice should set out:   
(i) the features of the aircraft that are susceptible to airworthiness effects related to 
volcanic ash;   
(ii) the nature and severity of these effects;   
(iii) the effect of volcanic ash on operations to/from contaminated aerodromes/  
operating sites, including the effect on take -off and  landing aircraft performance;  
(iv) the related pre -flight, in -flight and post -flight precautions to be observed by the 
ATO including any necessary amendments to aircraft operating manuals, aircraft 
maintenance manuals, master minimum equipment list/dispatch deviation or 
equivalents required  to support the ATO; and   
(v) the recommended inspections associated with inadvertent operations in volcanic 
ash contaminated airspace and operations to/from volcanic ash contaminated 
aerodromes/operating sites; this may take the form of instructions for continuing 
airworthiness or oth er advice.  
(2) ATO/contracted organisations’ personnel  
Definition of procedures for flight planning and operations ensuring that:   
(i) flight crews are in a position to evaluate correctly the risk of encountering 
volcanic ash contaminated airspace, or aerodromes/operating si tes, and can plan 
accordingly;  
(ii) flight planning and operational procedures enable crews to avoid areas and 
aerodromes/operating sites with unacceptable volcanic ash contamination;   
(iii) flight crew are aware of the possible signs of entry into a volcanic ash cloud and 
exec ute the associated procedures;  
(iv) continuing airworthiness personnel are able to assess the need for, and to execute, 
any necessary maintenance or other required interventions; and   
(v) crews are provided with appropriate aircraft performance data when operating 
to/from aerodromes/operating sites c ontaminated with volcanic ash.  
(3) Provision of enhanced flight watch  
This should ensure:   
(i) close and continuous monitoring of VAA, VAR/AIREP, SIGMET, NOTAM and 
ASHTAM and other relevant information, and information from crews, concerning 
the volcanic ash cloud hazard;   
(ii) access to plots of the affected areas from SIGMETs, NOTAMs and other relevant 
information for crews; and   
(iii) communication of the latest information to crews in a timely fashion.   
(4) Flight planning  
Flexibility of the process to allow re -planning at short notice should conditions change.   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1746 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1747  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(5) Departure, destination and alternate aerodromes  
For the airspace to be traversed, or the aerodromes/operating sites in use, parameters 
to evaluate and take account of:  
(i) the probability of contamination;   
(ii) any additional aircraft performance requirements;   
(iii) required maintenance considerations;   
(iv) fuel requirements for re -routeing and extended holding.   
(6) Routing policy  
Parameters to evaluate and take account of:   
(i) the shortest period in and over the forecast contaminated area;   
(ii) the hazards associated with flying over the contaminated area;   
(iii) drift down and emergency descent considerations;   
(iv) the policy for flying below the contaminated airspace and the associated hazards.   
(7) Diversion policy  
Parameters to evaluate and take account of:   
(i) maximum allowed distance from a suitable aerodrome/operating site;   
(ii) availability of aerodromes/operating sites outside the forecast contaminated area;   
(iii) diversion policy after an volcanic ash encounter.   
(8) Minimum equipment list  
Additional provisions in the MEL, if applicable, for dispatching aircraft with 
unserviceabilities that might affect the following n on-exhaustive list of systems:  
(i) air conditioning packs;   
(ii) engine bleeds;   
(iii) pressurisation system;   
(iv) electrical power distribution system;  
(v) air data system;   
(vi) standby instruments;   
(vii) navigation systems;  
(viii)  de-icing systems;  
(ix) engine driven generators;   
(x) auxiliary power unit (APU);   
(xi) airborne collision avoidance system (ACAS);   
(xii) terrain awareness warning system (TAWS);   
(xiii)  autoland systems;   
(xiv)  provision of crew oxygen;   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1747 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1748  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(xv) supplemental oxygen for passengers.   
(9) Standard operating procedures  
Crew training to ensure they are familiar with normal and abnormal operating procedures 
and particularly any changes regarding but not limited to:   
(i) pre-flight planning;   
(ii) in-flight monitoring of volcanic ash cloud affected areas and avoidance procedures;   
(iii) diversion;  
(iv) communications with ATC;  
(v) in-flight monitoring of engine and systems potentially affected by vol canic ash 
cloud contamination;  
(vi) recognition and detection of volcanic ash clouds and reporting procedures;  
(vii) in-flight indications of a  volcanic ash cloud encounter;  
(viii)  procedures to be followed if a volc anic ash cloud is encountered;  
(ix) unreliable or erroneous airspeed;   
(x) non-normal procedures for engines and systems potentially affected by volcanic 
ash cloud contamination;  
(xi) engine -out and engine relight;  
(xii) escape routes; and  
(xiii)  operations to/from aerodromes/operating sites c ontaminated with volcanic ash.  
(10) Provision for aircraft technical log  
This should ensure:   
(i) Systematic entry in the aircraft continuing airworthiness records or aircraft log if 
available related to any actual or suspected volcanic ash encounter whether in -
flight or at an aerodrome/operating site; and   
(ii) Checking, prior to flight, of the completion of maintenance actions related to an 
entry in the continuing airworthiness records or aircraft log if available for a 
volcanic ash cloud e ncounter on a previous flight.  
(11) Incident reporting  
Crew requirements for:   
(i) reporting an airborne volcanic ash cloud encounter (VAR);   
(ii) post -flight volcanic ash cloud reporting (VAR);  
(iii) reporting non encounters in airspace forecast to be contaminated; and   
(iv) filing a mandatory occurrence report in accordance with ORA.GEN.160 .  
(12) Continuing airworthiness procedures  
Procedures when operating in or near areas of volcanic ash cloud contamination:   
(i) enhancement of vigilance during inspections and regular maintenance and 
appropriate adjustm ents to maintenance practices;  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1748 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1749  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(ii) definition of a follow -up procedure when a volcanic ash cloud encounter has been 
reported or suspected;   
(iii) thorough investigation for any sign of unusual or accelerated abrasions or 
corrosion or of volcanic ash accumulation;   
(iv) reporting to TCHs and the relevant authorities observations and experiences from 
operations in areas of volcanic ash cloud contamination;   
(v) completion of any additional maintenance recommended by the TCH or by the 
competent authority.   
(f) Reporting  
The ATO should ensure that reports are immediately submitted to the nearest ATS unit using 
the VAR/AIREP procedures followed up by a more detailed VAR on landing together with, as 
applicable, a report as defined in Regulation (EU) No 996/2010 and Directive  2003/42/EC, and 
an aircraft technical log entry for:   
(1) any incident related to volcanic clouds;   
(2) any observation of volcanic ash activity and   
(3) anytime that volcanic ash is not encountered in an area where it was forecast to be.   
(g) Additional guidance  
Further guidance on volcanic ash safety risk assessment is given in ICAO Doc. 9974 (Flight safety 
and volcanic ash – Risk management of flight operations with known or forecast volcanic ash 
contamination).  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1749 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew (Regulation (EU) No 
1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1750  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
GM4 ORA.GEN.200(a)(3) Management system  
ED Decision 2013/008 /R 
SAFETY R ISK ASSESSMENT – RISK REGISTER  
The results of the assessment of the potential adverse consequences or outcome of each hazard may be recorded by the ATO in a  risk register, an exam ple 
of which is provided below.  
Hazard  Incident 
Sequence 
Description  Existing 
Controls  Outcome  
(Pre -Mitigation)  Additional 
Mitigation 
required  Outcome  
(Post -Mitigation)  Actions 
and 
Owners  Monitoring 
and Review 
Requirements  No Description  Severity  Likelihood  Risk  Severity  Likelihood  Risk  
             
             
             
             
             
             
             
 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1750 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1751  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(4) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
TRAINING AND COMMUNICATION ON SAFETY  
(a) Training  
(1) All personnel should receive safety training as appropriate for their safety responsibilities.  
(2) Adequate records of all safety training provided should be kept.   
(b) Communication  
(1) The organisation should establish communication about safety matters that:  
(i) ensures that all personnel are aware of the safety management activities as 
appropriate for their safety responsibilities;  
(ii) conveys safety critical information, especially relating to assessed risks and 
analysed hazards;  
(iii) explains why particular actions are taken; and  
(iv) explains why safety procedures are introduced or changed.  
(2) Regular meetings with personnel where information, actions and procedures are 
discussed may be used to communicate safety matters.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(4) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
TRAINING AND COMMUNICATION ON SAFETY  
The safety training programme may consist of self -instruction via a media (newsletters, flight safety 
magazines), class -room training, e -learning or similar training provided  by training service providers.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(5) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ORGANISATION’S  MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  
(a) The organisation’s management system documentation should at least include the following 
information:  
(1) a statement signed by the accountable manager to confirm that the organisation will 
continuously work in accordance with the applicable requirements and the organisation’s 
documentation as required by this Part;  
(2) the organisation's scope of activities;  
(3) the titles and names of persons referred to in ORA.GEN.210(a) and (b) ;  
(4) an organisation chart showing the lines of responsibility between the persons referred to 
in ORA.GEN.210 ;  
(5) a general description and location of the facilities referred to in ORA.GEN.215 ;  
(6) procedures specifying how the organisation ensures compliance wit h the applicable 
requirements;  
(7) the amendment procedure for the organisation’s management system documentation.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1751 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1752  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) The organisation’s management system documentation may be included in a separate manual 
or in (one of) the manual(s) as required by the applicable Subpart(s). A cross reference should 
be included.  
AMC 2 ORA.GEN.200(a)(5) Management system  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
COMPLE X ORGANISATIONS – ORGANISATION’S  SAFETY MANAGEMENT MANUAL  
(a) The safety management manual (SMM) should be the key instrument for communicating the 
approach to safety for the whole of the organisation. The SMM should document all aspects of 
safety management, including the safety policy, objectives, procedures and in dividual safety 
responsibilities.  
(b) The contents of the safety management manual should include all of the following:  
(1) scope of the safety management system;  
(2) safety policy and objectives;  
(3) safety accountability of the accountable manager;  
(4) safety responsibilities of key safety personnel;  
(5) documentation control procedures;  
(6) hazard identification and risk management schemes;  
(7) safety action planning;  
(8) safety performance monitoring;  
(9) incident investigation and reporting;  
(10) emergency response planning;  
(11) management of change (including organisational changes with regard to safety 
responsibilities);  
(12) safety promotion.  
(c) The SMM may be contained in (one of) the manual(s) of the organisation.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(5) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ORGANISATION’ S MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  
(a) It is not required to duplicate information in several manuals. The information may be contained 
in any of the organisation manuals (e.g. operations manual, training manual), which may also 
be combined.  
(b) The organisation may also choose to document some of the information required to be 
documented in separate documents (e.g. procedures). In this case, it should ensure that 
manuals contain adequate references to any document kept separately. Any such docum ents 
are then to be considered an integral part of the organisation’s ma nagement system 
documentation.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1752 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1753  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(6) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLIANCE MONITORING - GENERAL  
(a) Compliance monitoring  
The implementation and use of a compliance monitoring function should enable the 
organisation to monitor compliance with the relevant requirements of this Part and other 
applicable Parts.  
(1) The organisation should specify the basic structure of the compliance monitoring 
function applicable to the activities conducted.  
(2) The compliance monitoring function should be structured according to the size of the 
organisation and the complexity of the activities to be monitored.  
(b) Organisations should monitor compliance with the procedures they have designed to ensure 
safe activities. In doing so, they should as a minimum, and where appropriate, monitor:  
(1) privileges of the organisation;  
(2) manuals, logs, and records;  
(3) training standards;  
(4) management system procedures and manuals.  
(c) Organisational set up  
(1) To ensure that the organisation continues to meet the requirements of this Part and 
other applicable Parts, the accountable manager should designate a compliance 
monitoring manager. The role of the compliance monitoring manager is to ensure that 
the activi ties of the organisation are monitored for compliance with the applicable 
regulatory requirements , and any additional requirements as established by the 
organisation, and that these activities are being carried out properly under the 
supervision of th e relevant head of functional area.  
(2) The compliance monitoring manager should be responsible for ensuring that the 
compliance monitoring programme is properly implemented, maintained and continually 
reviewed and improved.  
(3) The compliance monitoring manager should:  
(i) have direct access to the accountable manager;   
(ii) not be one of the other persons referred to in ORA.GEN.210(b) ;   
(iii) be able to demonstrate relevant knowledge, background and appropriate 
experience related to the activities of the organisation; including knowledge and 
experience in compliance monitoring; and   
(iv) have access to all parts of the organisation, and as necessary, any contracted 
organisation.  
(4) In the case of a non -complex organisation, this task may be exercised by the accountable 
manager provided he/she has demonstrated having the related competence as defined 
in (c)(3)(iii).  
(5) In the case the same person acts as compliance monitoring manager and as safety 
manager, the accountable manager, with regards to his/her direct accountability for 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1753 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1754  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
safety, should ensure that sufficient resources are allocated to both functions, taking into 
account the size of the organisation and the nature and complexity of its activities.   
(6) The independence of the compliance monitoring function should be established by 
ensuring that audits and inspections are carried out by personnel not responsible for the 
function, procedure or products being audited.   
(d) Compliance monitoring documentation  
(1) Relevant documentation should include the relevant part(s) of the organisation’s 
management system documentation.  
(2) In addition, relevant documentation should also include the following:  
(i) terminology;  
(ii) specified activity standards;  
(iii) a description of the organisation;  
(iv) the allocation of duties and responsibilities;  
(v) procedures to ensure regulatory compliance;  
(vi) the compliance monitoring programme, reflecting:  
(A) schedule of the monitoring programme;  
(B) audit procedures;  
(C) reporting procedures;  
(D) follow -up and correc tive action procedures; and  
(E) recording system.  
(vii) the training s yllabus referred to in (e)(2);  
(viii)  document control.  
(e) Training  
(1) Correct and thorough training is essential to optimise compliance in every organisation. 
In order to achieve significant outcomes of such training, the organisation should ensure 
that all personnel understand the objectives as laid down in the organisation ’s 
management system documentation.  
(2) Those responsible for managing the compliance monitoring function should receive 
training on this task. Such training should cover the requirements of compliance 
monitoring, manuals and procedures related to the task, audit techniques, reporting and 
record ing.  
(3) Time should be provided to train all personnel involved in compliance management and 
for briefing the remainder of the personnel.  
(4) The allocation of time and resources should be governed by the volume and complexity 
of the activities concerned.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(a)(6) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLIANCE MONITORING - GENERAL  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1754 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1755  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(a) The organisational set -up of the compliance monitoring function should reflect the size of the 
organisation and the nature and complexity of its activities. The compliance monitoring 
manager may perform all audits and inspections himself/herself or appoint  one or more 
auditors by choosing personnel having the related competence as defined in 
AMC1  ORA.GEN.200(a)(6)  point (c)(3)(iii), either from withi n or outside the organisation.  
(b) Regardless of the option chosen it must be ensured that the independence of the audit function 
is not affected, in particular in cases where those performing the audit or inspection are also 
responsible for other functions within the organisation.  
(c) In case external personnel are used to perform compliance audits or inspections:  
(1) any such audits or inspections are performed under the responsibility of the comp liance 
monitoring manager; and  
(2) the organisation remains responsible to ensure that the external personnel has relevant 
knowledge, background and experience as appropriate to the activities being audited or 
inspected; including knowledge and experience in compliance monitoring.  
(d) The organisation retains the ultimate responsibility for the effectiveness of the compliance 
monitoring function in particular for the effective implementation and follow -up of all 
corrective actions.  
GM2 ORA.GEN.200(a)(6) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLEX ORGANISATIONS - COMPLIANCE MONITORING PROGRAMME FOR ATOs  
(a) Typical subject areas for compliance monitoring audits and inspections for approved training 
organisations (ATOs) should be the following:  
(1) facilities;  
(2) actual flight and ground training;  
(3) technical standards.  
(b) ATOs should monitor compliance with the training and operations manuals they have designed 
to ensure safe and efficient training. In doing so, they should, where appropriate, additionally 
monitor the following:  
(1) training procedures;  
(2) flight safety;  
(3) flight and duty time limitations, rest requirements and scheduling;  
(4) aircraft maintenance/operations interface.  
GM3 ORA.GEN.200(a)(6) Management system  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
AUDIT AND INSPECTION  
(a) ‘Audit’ means a systematic, independent and documented process for obtaining evidence and 
evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which r equirements are complied with.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1755 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1756  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) ‘Inspection’ means an independent documented conformity evaluation by observation and 
judgement accompanied as appropriate by measurement, testing or gauging, in order to verify 
compliance w ith applicable requirements.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(b) Management system  
ED Decision 2020/005/R  
SIZE, NATURE  AND COMPLEXITY OF THE ACTIVITY  
(a) An organisation should be considered as complex when it has a workforce of more than 20 full 
time equivalents (FTEs) involved in the activity subject to Regulation (EC) No 216/20081 and its 
Implementing Rules.  
(b) Organisations with up to 20 full time equivalents (FTEs) involved in the activity subject to 
Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 and its Implementing Rules, may also be considered complex 
based on an assessment of the following factors:  
(1) in terms of complexity, the extent and scope of contracted activities subject to the 
approval;  
(2) in terms of risk criteria, whether any of the following are present:  
(i) operations requiring the following specific approvals: performance  based 
navigation (PBN), low visibility operation (LVO), extended range operations with 
two-engined aeroplanes (ETOPS), helicopter hoist operation (HHO), helicopter 
emergency medical service (HEMS), night vision imaging system (NVIS) and 
dangerous goods (DG );  
(ii) different types of aircraft used;   
(iii) the environment (offshore, mountainous area etc.);  
(c) Regardless of the criteria mentioned in (a) and (b), the following organisations should always 
be considered as non -complex:  
(1) Approved Training Organisations (ATOs) only providing training for the light aircraft pilot 
licence (LAPL), private pilot licence (PPL), sailplane pilot licence (SPL) or balloon pilot 
licence (BPL) and the associated ratings and certificates;  
(2) Aero -Medical Centres (AeMCs).  
(d) Regardless of the criteria mentioned in (a) and (b), the organisations that provide training in the 
following areas should always be considered as complex:  
(1) full flight simulators (FFSs); or  
(2) multi -pilot (MP) type rating; or  
(3) zero -flight -time training (ZFTT); or  
(4) complex aircraft; or  
(5) different categories of aircraft; or  
(6) instructor certificates for point (2) and (4) aircraft; or  
 
1 Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 February 2008 on common rules in the field of  civil 
aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency, and repealing Council Directive 91/670/EEC, Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 
and Directive 2004/36/EC. OJ L 79, 19.3.2008, p. 1.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1756 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1757  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(7) two or more aerodromes/operating sites.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.200(c) Management system  
ED Decision 2015/011 /R 
ATOs PROVIDING TRAINING ONLY FOR THE LAPL, PPL, SPL AND BPL AND THE ASSOCIATED RATINGS OR 
CERTIF ICATES – ORGANISATIONAL REVIEW  
(a) The primary objective of the organisational review is to enable the organisation to ensure that 
its management system remains effective by verifying that it:   
(1) has continually identified its aviation safety hazards;   
(2) has effectively mitigated the associated risks; and   
(3) monitors compliance wit h the applicable requirements.  
(b) Safety risk management should:   
(1) be performed using internal safety or occurrence reports, hazard checklists, risk registers 
or similar risk management tools or processes, integrated into the a ctivities of the 
organisation;  
(2) in particular address safety risks related to a change; making use of the existing hazard 
identification, risk assessment and mitigation tools or processes; and   
(3) include provisions for emergency response or a formal Emergency Response Plan (ERP).   
(c) As part of the management system documentation required by ORA.GEN.200(a)(5) , the 
organisation should describe the organisational review programme and related responsibilities. 
Persons responsible for the organisational review should have a thorough knowledge of the 
applicable requirements and of the organisation’s procedures.  
(d) The status of all corrective and risk mitigation actions should be monitored by the person 
responsible for the organisational review programme and implemented within a specified time 
frame. Action closure should be recorded by the person responsible for t he organisational 
review programme, along with a summary of the action taken.   
(e) The results of the organisational review, including all non -compliance findings and new risks 
identified during the review, should be presented to the accountable manager and the person 
or group of persons nominated in accordance with ORA.GEN.210(b)  prior to notification to the 
competent authority. All level 1 findings in the sense of ARA.GEN.350 should be immediately 
notified to the competent authority and all necess ary actions immediately taken.  
(f) Based on the results of the organisational review, the accountable manager should determine 
the need for and initiate, as appropriate, further actions to address deficiencies in or further 
improve the orga nisation’s management system.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.200(c) Management system  
ED Decision 2015/011 /R 
ATOs PROVIDING TRAINING ONLY FOR THE LAPL, PPL, SPL OR BPL AND THE ASSOCIATED RATINGS OR 
CERTIFICATES – ORGANISATIONAL REVIEW PROGRAMME  
(a) The organisational re view programme may consist of:  
(1) checklist(s) covering all items necessary to be addressed in order to ensure that the 
organisation identified its aviation safety hazards, effectively mitigates the associated 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1757 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1758  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
risks and ensures effective compliance with the applicable requirements. These should 
address all procedures described in the management system documentation and training 
manual; and   
(2) a schedule for the accomplishment of the different checklist items, with each item being 
checked at least once within any 12 -month period. The organisation may choose to 
conduct one full review annually or to co nduct several partial reviews.  
(b) Performance of organisational reviews:   
Each review item may be addressed using an appropriate combination of:   
(1) review of training records, training documentation;   
(2) review of internal safety reports (e.g. notified difficulties in using current procedures  and 
training material, etc.);  
(3) review of the risk register and hazard checklists, as applicable;   
(4) sample check of training courses;   
(5) witnessing of examinations, as appropriate;   
(6) interview of the personnel involved; and   
(7) review of the feedback provided by students and customers.   
(c) It is recommended that internal safety reports and occurrence reports be reviewed on a 
continual basis with the aim of identifying possible corrective and risk mitigation a ctions.  
GM2 ORA.GEN.200(c) Management system  
ED Decision 2015/011 /R 
ATOs PROVIDING TRAINING ONLY FOR THE LAPL, PPL, SPL OR BPL AND THE ASSOCIATED RATINGS OR 
CERTIFICATES  – ORGANISATIONAL REVIEW ITEMS  
The following provides a list of typical items for an organisational review checklist, to be adapted as 
necessary to cover all relevant procedures described in the management system docu mentation and 
training manual:  
(a) Terms of approval  
Check that:   
(1) no training has been performed outside the terms of approval;   
(2) changes not requiring prior approval have been properly managed.   
(b) Trainin g syllabi and course material  
Check that:  
(1) training syllabi and course materials are in compliance with the applicable requirements, 
as last amended;   
(2) training practices are in compliance with the documentation; and   
(3) instructor traini ng practices are standardised.  
(c) Training equipment and tools  
Check that all equipment and tools other than aircraft and FSTDs are present and meet the 
criteria defined in the training manual.   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1758 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1759  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(d) Facilities  
Check that the facilities meet the criteria d efined in the training manual.  
(e) Training aircraft and FSTDs  
Check that the training aircraft and FSTDs meet the criteria defined in the training manual.  
(f) Personnel    
Check that:   
(1) the current accountable manager and other nominated persons are correctly identified;   
(2) the organisation chart accurately indicates lines of responsibility and accountabilit y 
throughout the organisation;  
(3) the organisation remains in compliance with the applicable requirements, in case the 
number of personnel has decreased or if the activity has increased;   
(4) the qualification of all new personnel (or personnel with new functions) has  been 
appropriately assessed;  
(5) staff involved in any safety management -related processes and tasks has been properly 
trained; and   
(6) staff has been trained, as necessary, to cover changes in regulations, in competent 
authority publications, in the organisation, its management system documentation and 
in associated procedures, etc.   
(g) Contracted activities (In case the organisation has contracted activities):   
(1) Check that new providers have been assessed prior to the establishment of any contract;   
(2) For existing providers approved for such activities: check the authorisation and approval 
status of the contracted organisation; and   
(3) For existing providers not approved for such activities: check that the service provided 
conforms to the applicable requirements of this Part.   
(h) Training and communication on safety  
Check that:  
(1) all personnel are aware of safety management policies, processes and tasks;   
(2) safety -related documentations and publications are available; and   
(3) safety -critical information derived from internal safety or occurrence reporting and 
hazard identification have been timely communicated to all staff concerned.   
(i) Management system documentation  
Check that:  
(1) the documentation is adequate and updated;   
(2) staff are aware of the safety policy; and   
(3) staff can easily access such documentation when needed.   
(j) Record -keeping  
Check that:  
(1) the records cover all the training activities and management system processes; and   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1759 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1760  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(2) minimum record -keeping periods (random checks) are complied with.   
(k) Emergen cy response provisions or ERP  
Check that:  
(1) emergency response information is up to date and readily available; and   
(2) all staff are aware of emergency response information or the ERP, a s applicable (random 
checks).  
(l) Internal safety or occurrence reporting procedures   
(1) Check the number of reports received since the last review;   
(2) Check that:  
(i) internal reporting and external occurrence reporting are performed in accordance 
with reporting procedures;  
(ii) the safety or occurrence reports are analysed; and   
(iii) feedback is provided to reporters.   
(m) Other risk management tools or processes implemented  
(1) As applicable, check that:   
(i) records of hazards and risks are assessed; in particular following analysis of safety 
or occurrence reports and when significant changes occur (regulations, personnel, 
training aircraft, training courses, etc.);   
(ii) the risks are assessed and the risk mitigation actions followed  up and recorded;   
(iii) any risk that has been found acceptable is duly justified; and   
(iv) the assumptions made for the risk assessment remain valid;   
(2) Verify the effectiveness of all risk mitigation actions initiated since the last organisational 
review.   
ORA.GEN.200A Information security management system  
Regulation (EU) 2023/203  
In addition to the management system referred to in point ORA.GEN.200 , the organisation shall 
establish, implement and maintain an information security management system in accordance with 
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/203  in order to ensure the proper management of information 
security risks which may have an impact on aviation safety.  
[applicable from 22 February 2026 — Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/203]  
ORA.GEN.205 Contracted activities  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) Contracted activities include all activities within the organisation’s scope of approval that are 
performed by another organisation either itself certified to carry out such activity or if not 
certified, working under the contracting organisation’s approv al. The organisation shall ensure 
that when contracting or purchasing any part of its activity, the contracted or purchased service 
or product conforms to the applicable requirements.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1760 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1761  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) When the certified organisation contracts any part of its activity to an organisation that is not 
itself certified in accordance with this Part to carry out such activity, the contracted organisation 
shall work under the approval of the contracting organi sation. The contracting organisation 
shall ensure that the competent authority is given access to the contracted organisation, to 
determine continued compliance with the applicable requirements.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.205 Contracted activities  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
RESPONSIBILITY WHEN CONTRACTING ACTIVITIES  
(a) The organisation may decide to contract certain activities to external organisations.  
(b) A written agreement should exist between the organisation and the contracted organisation 
clearly defining the contracted activities and the applicable requirements.  
(c) The contracted safety related activities relevant to the agreement should be included in the 
organisation's safety management and compliance monitoring programmes.  
(d) The organisation should ensure that the contracted organisation has the necessary 
authorisation or approval when required, and commands the resources and competence to 
undertake the task.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.205 Contracted activities  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
RESPONSIBILITY WHEN CONTRACTING ACTIVITIES  
(a) Regardless of the approval status of the contracted organisation, the contracting organisation 
is responsible to ensure that all contracted activities are subject to hazard identification and risk 
management as required by ORA.GEN.200(a)(3)  and to compliance monitoring as required by 
ORA.GEN.200(a)(6) . 
(b) When the contracted organisation is itself certified to carry out the contracted activities, the 
organisation’s compliance monitoring should at least check that the approval effectively covers 
the contracted activiti es and that it is still valid.  
(c) If the organisation requires the contracted organisation to conduct an activity which exceeds 
the contracted organisation’s terms of approval, this will be considered as the contracted 
organisation working under the approval of  the contracting organisation.  
ORA.GEN.210 Personnel requirements  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) The organisation shall appoint an accountable manager, who has the authority for ensuring that 
all activities can be financed and carried out in accordance with the applicable requirements. 
The accountable manager shall be responsible for establishing and maintaining an effective 
management system.  
(b) A person or group of persons shall be nominated by the organisation, with the responsibility of 
ensuring that the organisation remains in compliance with the applicable requirements. Such 
person(s) shall be ultimately responsible to the accountable manage r. 
(c) The organisation shall have sufficient qualified personnel for the planned tasks and activities to 
be performed in accordance with the applicable requirements.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1761 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1762  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(d) The organisation shall maintain appropriate experience, qualification and training records to 
show compliance with paragraph (c).  
(e) The organisation shall ensure that all personnel are aware of the rules and procedures relevant 
to the exercise of their duties.  
ORA.GEN.215 Facility requirements  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
The organisation shall have facilities allowing the performance and management of all planned tasks 
and activities in accordance with the applicable requirements.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.215 Facility requirements  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ATOs PROVIDING  TRAINING FOR the CPL, MPL AND ATPL AND THE ASSOC IATED RATINGS AND CERTIFICATES  
(a) For ATOs providing flight training, the following flight operations accommodation should be 
available:  
(1) an operations room with facilities to control flying operations;  
(2) a flight planning room with the following facilities:  
(i) appropriate current maps and charts;  
(ii) current aeronautical information service (AIS) information;  
(iii) current meteorological information;  
(iv) communications to air traffic control (ATC) and the operations room;  
(v) any other flight safety related material.  
(3) adequate briefing rooms/cubicles of sufficient size and number;  
(4) suitable offices for the supervisory personnel and room(s) to allow flight instructors to 
write reports on students, complete records and other related documentation;  
(5) furnished crew -room(s) for instructors and students.  
(b) For ATOs providing theoretical knowledge training, the following facilities for theoretical 
knowledge instruction should be available:  
(1) adequate classroom accommodation for the current student population;  
(2) suitable demonstration equipment to support the theoretical knowledge instruction;  
(3) a radiotelephony training and testing facility;  
(4) a reference library containing publications giving coverage of the syllabus;  
(5) offices for the instructional personnel.  
AMC2 ORA.GEN.215 Facility requirements  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ATOs PROVIDING TRAINING FOR THE LAPL, PPL, SPL OR BPL AND THE ASSOCIATED RATINGS AND 
CERTIFICATES  
(a) The following flight operations accommodation should be available:  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1762 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1763  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) a flight planning room with the following facilities:  
(i) appropriate current aviation maps and charts;  
(ii) current AIS information;  
(iii) current meteorological information;  
(iv) communications to ATC (if applicable);  
(v) any other flight safety related material.  
(2) adequate briefing room(s)/cubicles of sufficient size and number;  
(3) suitable office(s) to allow flight instructors to write reports on students, complete records 
and other related documentation;  
(4) suitable rest areas for instructors and students, where appropriate to the training task;  
(5) in the case of ATOs providing training for the BPL or LAPL(B) only, the flight operations 
accommodation listed in (a)(1) to (a)(4) may be replaced by other suitable facilities when 
operating outside aerodromes.  
(b) The following facilities for theoretical knowledge instruction should be available:  
(1) adequate classroom accommodation for the current student population;  
(2) suitable demonstration equipment to support the theoretical knowledge instruction;   
(3) suitable office(s) for the instructional personnel.  
(c) A single room may be sufficient to provide the functions listed in (a) and (b).  
ORA.GEN.220 Record -keeping  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The organisation shall establish a system of record –keeping that allows adequate storage and 
reliable traceability of all activities developed, covering in particular all the elements indicated 
in ORA.GEN.200 . 
(b) The format of the records shall be specified in the organisation’s procedures.  
(c) Records shall be stored in a manner that ensures protection from damage, alteration and theft.  
AMC1 ORA.GEN.220(b) Record -keeping  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
GENERAL  
(a) The record -keeping system should ensure that all records are accessible whenever needed 
within a reasonable time. These records should be organised in a way that ensures traceability 
and retrievability throughout the required retention period.  
(b) Records should be kept in paper form or in electronic format or a combination of both. Records 
stored on microfilm or optical disc format are also acceptable. The records should remain legible 
throughout the required retention period. The retention period starts when the record has been 
created or last amended.  
(c) Paper systems should use robust material which can withstand normal handling and filing. 
Computer systems should have at least one backup system which should be updated within 24 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1763 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART GEN – GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1764  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
hours of any new entry. Computer systems should include safeguards against the ability of 
unauthorised personnel to alter the data.  
(d) All computer hardware used to ensure data backup should be stored in a different location from 
that containing the working data and in an environment that ensures they remain in good 
condition. When hardware or software changes take place, special care sho uld be taken that all 
necessary data continues to be accessible at least through the full period specified in the 
relevant Subpart. In the absence of such indication, all records should be kept for a minimum 
period of 5 years.  
GM1 ORA.GEN.220(b) Record -keeping  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
RECORDS  
Microfilming or optical storage of records may be carried out at any time. The records should be as 
legible as the original record and remain so for the required retention period.


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1764 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1765  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
SUBPART  ATO  – APPROVED  TRAINING  ORGANISATIONS  
SECTION  I – GENERAL  
ORA.ATO.100 Scope  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
This Subpart establishes the requirements to be met by organisations providing training for pilot 
licences and associated ratings and certificates.  
GM1 ORA.ATO.100 Scope  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
The content of this Section contains the requirements applicable to all ATOs providing training for 
pilot licences and the associated ratings and certificates.   
It is applicable to ATOs providing training for:  
(a) the LAPL, PPL, SPL and BPL and the associated ratings and certificates; and  
(b) the commercial pilot licence (CPL), multi -crew pilot licence (MPL) and airline transport pilot 
licence (ATPL) and the associated ratings and certificates.  
ORA.ATO.105 Application  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) Applicants for the issue of a certificate as an approved training organisation (ATO) shall provide 
the competent authority with:  
(1) the following information:  
(i) name and address of the training organisation;  
(ii) date of intended commencement of activity;  
(iii) personal details and qualifications of the head of training (HT), the flight 
instructor(s), flight simulation training instructors and the theoretical knowledge 
instructor(s);  
(iv) name(s) and address(es) of the aerodromes(s) and/or operating site(s) at which 
the training is to be conducted;  
(v) list of aircraft to be operated for training, including their group, class or type, 
registration, owners and category of the certificate of airworthiness, if applicable  
(vi) list of flight simulation training devices (FSTDs) that the training organisation 
intends to use, if applicable;  
(vii) the type of training that the training organisation wishes to provide and the 
corresponding training programme; and  
(2) the operations and training manuals.  
(b) Flight test training organisations. Notwithstanding (a)(1)(iv) and (v), training organisations 
providing flight test training shall only need to provide:  

### ORA.ATO (1765-1805)


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1765 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1766  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) the name(s) and address(es) of the main aerodromes and/or operating site(s) at which 
the training is to be conducted; and  
(2) a list of the types or categories of aircraft to be used for flight test training.  
(c) In the case of a change to the certificate, applicants shall provide the competent authority with 
the relevant parts of the information and documentation referred to in (a).  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.105 Application  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
APPLICATION FORM  
APPLICATION FORM FOR AN ATO CERTIFICATE  
N°  Question  Supplementary information  
1.  Name of training organisation under which the 
activity is to take place  address, fax number, e -mail, URL  
2.  Training courses offered  theory and/or flight training  
3.  Name of head of training  type and number of licence  full/part -time  
4.  Name of chief flight instructor  as (3)  
5.  Name of chief theoretical knowledge instructor  as (3)  
6.  Name of flight instructor(s), where applicable  as (3)  
7.  Aerodrome(s) / operating site(s) to be used  IFR approaches, if applicable night flying, if 
applicable air traffic control flight testing facilities, if 
applicable data reply facilities, if applicable  
8.  Flight operations accommodation  location, number and size of rooms  
9.  Theoretical instruction facilities  location, number and size of rooms  
10.  Description of training devices (as applicable)  FFS, FNPT I, II and III, FTD 1, 2 and 3, and 3, and BITD  
11.  Description of aircraft  Class/type(s) of aircraft registration of aircraft IFR 
equipped, if applicable  
Flight test instrumentation, if applicable  
12.  Prop osed administration and manuals : (submit 
with application if required )  (a) course programmes  
(b) training records  
(c) operations manual  
(d) training manual   
13.  Details of proposed compliance monitoring 
system    


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1766 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1767  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Note 1: If answers to any of the above questions are incomplete, the applicant should provide full details of 
alternative arrangements separately.  
Note 2: instrument flight rules (IFR), full flight simulator (FFS), flight and navigation procedures trainer (FNPT), 
flight training device (FTD), basic in strument training device (BITD)  
 
I, (name) , on behalf of ( name of training organisation ) certify that all the above named persons are in 
compliance with the applicable requirements and that all the above information given is complete and 
correct. (Date) (Signature)  
ORA.ATO.110 Personnel requirements  
Regulation (EU) 2020/359  
(a) An HT shall be nominated. The HT shall have extensive experience as an instructor in the areas 
relevant for the training provided by the ATO and shall possess sound managerial capability.  
(b) The HT’s responsibilities shall include:  
(1) ensuring that the training provided is in compliance with Annex  I (Part -FCL), Annex  III 
(Part -BFCL) to Commission Regulation (EU)  2018/395 , Annex  III (Part -SFCL) to 
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU)  2018/1976 , as applicable, and, in the case of 
flight test training, that the relevant requirements of Annex  I (Part 21) to Commission 
Regulation (EU) No  748/2012  and the training programme have been established ; 
(2) ensuring the satisfactory integration of flight training in an aircraft or a flight simulation 
training device (FSTD) and theoretical knowledge instruction; and  
(3) supervising the progress of individual students.  
(c) Theoretical knowledge instructors shall have:  
(1) practical background in aviation in the areas relevant for the training provided and have 
undergone a course of training in instructional techniques; or  
(2) previous experience in giving theoretical knowledge instruction and an appropriate 
theoretical background in the subject on which they will provide theoretical knowledge 
instruction.  
(d) Flight instructors and flight simulation training instructors shall hold the qualifications required 
by Annex  I (Part -FCL), Annex  III (Part -BFCL) to Commission Regulation (EU)  2018/395  and 
Annex  III (Part -SFCL) to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU)  2018/1976  for the type of 
training they provide . 
AMC1 ORA.ATO.110(b) Personnel requirements  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
HEAD OF TRAINING  
The nominated head of training (HT) should have the overall responsibility to ensure that the training 
is in compliance with the appropriate requirements. In an ATO providing training courses for different 
aircraft categories, the HT shall be assisted by one or more nominated deputy HT(s) fo r certain flight 
training courses.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.110(c) Personnel requirements  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE INSTRUCTORS  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1767 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1768  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Theoretical knowledge instructors should, before appointment, prove their competency by giving a 
test lecture based on material they have developed for the subjects they are to teach.  
GM1 ORA.ATO.110(d) Personnel requirements  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
(a) Before allowing an FI that is experienced as specified in point FCL.905.FI (h)(3) to supervise SPIC 
flights during an IR training course, the ATO should consider at least the following factors:  
(1) the experience of the FI;  
(2) the experience of the student pilot;  
(3) the nature and complexity of the SPIC flight to be performed;  
(4) the complexity and characteristics of the training aircraft; and  
(5) the prevailing weather conditions.  
(b) The ATO should identify the hazards related to the SPIC supervision and apply appropriate 
mitigation measures to reduce the associated risks.  
ORA.ATO.120 Record -keeping  
Regulation (EU) 2018/1119  
The following records shall be kept throughout the course and for a period of three years after the 
completion of the training  : 
(a) details of ground, flight, and simulated flight training given to individual students;  
(b) detailed and regular progress reports from instructors including assessments, and regular 
progress flight tests and ground examinations; and  
(c) information on the licences and associated ratings and certificates of the students, including 
the expiry dates of medical certificates and ratings.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.120(a);(b) Record -keeping   
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ATOs PROVIDING TRAINING ONLY FOR THE LAPL, PPL, SPL OR BPL AND THE ASSO CIATED RATINGS AND 
CERTIFICATES  
The details of ground, flight and flight instruction by using FSTD given to a specific individual student 
and the detailed progress reports from instructors may be kept also in a student’s progress card. This 
progress card should contain all the exercises of the training syllabus. The instructor should sign this 
card if a certain exercise has been completed or a specific assessment has been conducted.  
ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
Regulation (EU) 2020/359  
(a) A training programme shall be developed for each type of course offered.  
(b) The training programme shall comply with the requiremen ts of Annex  I (Part -FCL), Annex  III 
(Part -BFCL) to Commission Regulation (EU)  2018/395 , Annex  III (Part -SFCL) to Commission 
Implementing Regulation (EU)  2018/1976 , as applicable, and, in the case of flight test training, 
the relevant requirements of Annex  I (Part 21) to Commission Regulation (EU) No  748/2012 . 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1768 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1769  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
AMC1 ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
GENERAL  
Flight training in an FSTD and theoretical knowledge instruction should be phased in such a manner 
as to ensure that students are able to apply to flight exercises the knowledge gained on the ground. 
Arrangements should be made so that problems encountered  during instruction can be resol ved 
during subsequent training.  
AMC2 ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
TYPE RATING COURSES – AEROPLANES  
(a) Introduction  
(1) When developing the training programme for a type rating course, in addition to 
complying with the standards included in the operational suitability data (OSD), as 
established in accordance with Regulation (EC) 1702/20031 for the applicable type, the 
ATO should also follow any further recommendations contained therein.  
(2) The type rating course should, as far as possible, provide for a continual process of 
ground, FSTD and flight training to enable the student to assimilate the knowledge and 
skills required to operate a specific aircraft type safely and efficiently. The st udent’s 
ability to do this should be determined by the demonstration of a satisfactory level of 
theoretical knowledge of the aircraft determined by progressive checking of knowledge 
and examination, progressive assessment by the ATO during flight traini ng and the 
successful completion of a practical skill test with an examiner.   
(3) The type rating course should normally be conducted as a single, fulltime course of study 
and training. However, in the situation where the course is intended to enable a pilot to 
fly a further aircraft type while continuing to fly a current type, such as  to enable mixed 
fleet flying with the same operator, some elements of the theoretical knowledge course 
conducted by self -study may be undertaken while the student continues to fly the current 
type.  
(b) Variants  
(1) Familiarisation: Where an aeroplane type rating also includes variants of the same aircraft 
type requiring familiarisation, the additional familiarisation element  may be included in 
the theoretical knowledge training of the initial type rating course.  
(2) Differences training: Where an aeroplane type rating also includes variants of the same 
aircraft type for which difference training is required, the initial training course should be 
directed towards a single variant. Additional training to operate other variants within the 
same type rating should be completed after successful completion of the initial type 
rating course. However, elements of this differences training may be undertaken at 
appropriate stages of the initial course, with the agreement of t he competent authority.  
(c) Programme of theoretical knowledge and flight training  
 
1 Commission Regulation (EC) No 1702/2003 of 24 September 2003 laying down implementing rules for the airworthiness and 
environmental certification of aircraft and related products, parts and appliances, as well as for the certification of desig n and 
product ion organisations (Part 21) (OJ L 243, 27.9.2003, p. 6). Regulation as last amended by Regulation (EC) No 1194/20 09 (OJ L 321, 
8.12.2009, p. 5).  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1769 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1770  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) The training programme should specify the time allocated to theoretical knowledge 
training, FSTD training and, if not approved for zero flighttime training (ZFTT), the 
aeroplane. The initial type rating course should be programmed on the basis that the 
student has the minimum licensing and experience requirements for entry to the course. 
For a first type rating on a multi -pilot aeroplane (MPA), the course should also provide 
for consolidation and type -specific training in those elements of basic multi -crew 
cooperation (MCC) training relevant to the type or variant.  
(2) If the ATO wishes to provide a training course that includes credit for previous experience 
on similar types of aircraft, such as those with common systems or operating procedures 
with the new type, the entry requirements to such courses should be specifi ed by the 
ATO and should define the minimum level of experience and qualification required of the 
flight crew member.  
(3) The ATO is permitted to contract elements of training to a third party training provider. 
In such cases the contracted organisation should normally be approved to conduct such 
training. When the contracted organisation is not an ATO, the competent authori ty 
should, within the approval process of the ATO, include the contracted organisation and 
be satisfied that the standard of training intended to be given meets the requirements. 
The other obligations of the ATO, such as student progress monitoring and an adequate 
management system, can be exercised by the ATO seeking approval and which retains 
responsibility for the whole course.  
GROUND TRAINING  
(d) Syllabus  
The ground training syllabus should provide for the student to gain a thorough understanding 
of the operation, function and, if appropriate, abnormal and emergency operation of all aircraft 
systems. This training should also include those systems essential  to the operation of the 
aircraft, such as ‘fly -by-wire’ flight control systems, even if the flight crew have little or no 
control of their normal or abnormal operation.  
(e) Theoretical knowledge instruction  
The theoretical knowledge instruction training should meet the general objectives of (but not 
be limited to) giving the student:  
(1) a thorough knowledge of the aircraft structure, powerplant and systems, and their 
associated limitations, including mass and balance, aircraft performance and flight 
planning considerations;  
(2) a knowledge of the positioning and operation of the cockpit controls and indicators for 
the aircraft and its systems;  
(3) an understanding of system malfunctions, their effect on aircraft operations and 
interaction with other systems; and  
(4) the understanding of normal, abnormal and emergency procedures.  
(f) Facilities and training aids  
The ATO should provide adequate facilities for classroom instruction and have available 
appropriately qualified and experienced instructors. Training aids should enable students to 
gain practical experience of the operation of systems covered by the theore tical knowledge 
syllabus and, in the case of multi -pilot aeroplanes, enable such practical application of the 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1770 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1771  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
knowledge to be carried out in a multi -crew environment. Facilities should be made available 
for student self -study outside the formal training programme.  
(g) Computer -based training (CBT)  
CBT provides a valuable source of theoretical instruction, enabling the students to progress at 
their own pace within specified time limits. Many such systems ensure that syllabus subjects 
are fully covered and progress can be denied until a satisfactory a ssimilation of knowledge has 
been demonstrated. Such systems may allow self -study or distance learning, if they incorporate 
adequate knowledge testing procedures. When CBT is used as part of the theoretical knowledge 
instruction phase, the student should a lso have access to a suitably qualified instructor able to 
assist with areas of difficulty for the student.  
(h) Self-study and distance learning  
Elements of the theoretical knowledge syllabus may be adequately addressed by distance 
learning, if approved, or self -study, particularly when utilising CBT. Progress testing, either by 
self-assessed or instructor -evaluated means should be included in any self -study programme. If 
self-study or distance learning is inclu ded in the theoretical knowledge training, the course 
should also provide for an adequate period of supervised consol idation and knowledge testing.  
(i) Progress tests and final theoretical knowledge examination  
(1) The theoretical knowledge training programme should provide for progressive testing of 
the assimilation of the required knowledge. This testing process should also provide for 
retesting of syllabus items so that a thorough understanding of the required kn owledge 
is assured. This should be achieved by intervention by a qualified instructor or, if using 
CBT with a self -testing facility, and by further testing during the supervised consolidation 
phase of the ground course.  
(2) The final theoretical knowledge examination should cover all areas of the theoretical 
knowledge syllabus. The final examination should be conducted as a supervised written 
(including computer -based) knowledge test without reference to course material. The  
pass mark of 75% assumes the achievement of satisfactory levels of knowledge during 
the progressive phase tests of the course. The student should be advised of any areas of 
lack of knowledge displayed during the examination and, if necessary, given rem edial 
instruction. A successful pass of the theoretical knowledge course and final examination 
should be a pre -requisite for progression to the flight training phase of the type rating 
course, unless otherwise determined in the OSD established in accordanc e with 
Regulation (EC) 1702/2003.  
FLIGHT TRAINING  
(j) Flight simulation training devices (FSTDs)  
A type rating course for a multi -pilot aeroplane should include FSTD training.  
The amount of training required when using FSTDs will depend on the complexity of the 
aeroplane concerned, and to some extent on the previous experience of the pilot. Except for 
those courses giving credit for previous experience (c.2.), a minimum of 32 ho urs of FSTD 
training should be programmed for a crew of a multipilot aeroplane, of which at least 16 hours 
should be in an FFS operating as a crew. FFS time may be reduced if other qualified FSTDs used 
during the flight training programme accurately replic ate the cockpit environment, operation 
and aeroplane response. Such FSTDs may typically include flight management computer (FMC) 
training devices using hardware and computer programmes identical to those of the aeroplane.  
(k) Aeroplane training with FFS  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1771 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1772  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) with the exception of courses approved for ZFTT, certain training exercises normally 
involving take -off and landing in various configurations should be completed in the 
aeroplane rather than in an FFS. Unless otherwise specified in the OSD established in 
accordance with Regulation (EU) No 748/2012 this take -off and landing training should 
include:  
(A) at least four landings in the case of MPAs (or single -pilot high performance complex 
aeroplanes (SP HPAs)) where the student pilot has more than 500 hours of MPA 
experience (or SPA experience) in aeroplanes of similar size and performance or, 
in all other cases, at least six landings;  
(B) at least one full -stop landing; and  
(C) one go -around with all engines operating.  
This aeroplane training may be completed after the student pilot has completed the FSTD 
training and has successfully undertaken the type rating skill test, provided it does not 
exceed 2 hours  of the flight training course.  
(2) courses approved for ZFTT  
(i) During the specific simulator session before line flying under supervision (LIFUS), 
consideration should be given to varying conditions, for example:  
(A) runway surface conditions;  
(B) runway length;  
(C) flap setting;  
(D) power setting;  
(E) crosswind and turbulence conditions; and  
(F) maximum take -off mass (MTOM) and maximum landing mass (MLM).  
(ii) At least one landing  should be  conducted as full -stop landing . The session should 
be flown in normal operation. Special attention should be given to the taxiing 
technique.  
(iii) A training methodology should be agreed with the competent authority that 
ensures the trainee is fully competent with the exterior inspection of the aeroplane 
before conducting su ch an inspection un -supervised.  
(iv) The LIFUS should be performed as soon as possible after the specific FFS session.  
(v) The licence endorsement should be entered on the licence after the skill test, but 
before the first four take -offs and landings in the aeroplane. At the discretion of 
the competent authority, provisional or temporary endorsement and any 
restriction sh ould be entered on the licence.  
(vi) Where a specific arrangement exists between the ATO and the commercial air 
transport operator, the operator proficiency check (OPC) and the ZFTT specific 
details should be conducted using the operator's standa rd operating procedures 
(SOPs).  
(3) All training exercises should be designed to remain within the training envelope as 
determined by the ATO (Note: Further guidance regarding the training envelope can be 
found in GM1 ORA.ATO.125  point (f)).  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1772 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1773  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(l) Aeroplane without FFS  
(1) Flight training conducted solely in an aeroplane without the use of FSTDs cannot cover 
the crew resource management (CRM) and multicrew cockpit (MCC) aspects of MPA 
flight training, and for safety reasons cannot cover all emergency and abnormal aircraft 
operation required for the training and skill test. In such cases, the ATO should 
demonstrate to the competent authority that ad equate training in these aspects can be 
achieved by other means. For training conducted solely on an MPA where two pilots are 
trained together without the use of an FSTD, a minimum of 8 hours of flight training as 
pilot flying (PF) for each pilot should no rmally be required. For training on a single -pilot 
aeroplane, 10 hours of flight training should normally be required. It is accepted that for 
some relatively simple single or multi -engine aircraft without systems such as 
pressurisation, flight management system (FMS) or electronic cockpit display s, this 
minimum may be reduced.  
(2) Aeroplane training normally involves an inherent delay in achieving an acceptable flight 
situation and configuration for training to be carried out in accordance with the agreed 
syllabus. These could include ATC or other traffic delay on the ground prior to take -off, 
the necessity to climb to height or transit to suitable training areas and the unavoidable 
need to physically reposition the aircraft for subsequent or repeat manoeuvres or 
instrument approaches. In such cases it should be ensured that the training syllabus 
provides adequate flexibility to enable the minimum amount of required fli ght training 
to be carried out.  
(la) Additional UPRT training as per point FCL.725.A(c) UPRT as per point FCL.725.A(c) should include 
the elements and components in table 1.  
 
Table 1: Elements and respective components of upset prevention training  
Elements and components  TK instruction  FSTD/ Aeroplane 
training  
A. Aerodynamics  
1. General aerodynamic characteristics  •  
2. Aeroplane certification and limitations  •  
3. Aerodynamics (high and low altitudes)  • • 
4. Aeroplane performance (high and low altitudes)  • • 
5. AoA and stall awareness  • • 
6. Stick shaker or other stall-warning device activation (as 
applicable)  • • 
7. Stick pusher (as applicable)  • • 
8. Mach effects (if applicable to the aeroplane type)  • • 
9. Aeroplane stability  • • 
10. Control surface fundamentals  • • 
11. Use of trims  • • 
12. Icing and contamination effects  • • 
13. Propeller slipstream (as applicable)  • • 
B. Causes of and contributing factors to upsets  
1. Environmental  •  
2. Pilot -induced  •  
3. Mechanical (aeroplane systems)  •  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1773 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1774  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Elements and components  TK instruction  FSTD/ Aeroplane 
training  
C. Safety review of accidents and incidents relating to aeroplane upsets  
1. Safety review of accidents and incidents relating to aeroplane 
upsets  •  
D. G-load awareness and management  
1. Positive/negative/increasing/decreasing G -loads  • • 
2. Lateral G awareness (sideslip)  • • 
3. G-load management  • • 
E. Energy management  
1. Kinetic energy vs potential energy vs effect of thrust -drag ratio 
on the total energy  • • 
F. Flight path management  
1. Relationship between pitch, power and performance  • • 
2. Performance and effects of differing power plants (if applicable)  • • 
3. Manual and automation inputs for guidance and control  • • 
4. Type -specific characteristics  • • 
5. Management of go -arounds from various stages during the 
approach  • • 
6. Automation management  • • 
7. Proper use of rudder  • • 
G. Recognition  
1. Type -specific examples of physiological, visual and instrument 
clues during developing and developed upsets  • • 
2. Pitch/power/roll/yaw  • • 
3. Effective scanning (effective monitoring)  • • 
4. Type -specific stall protection systems and cues  • • 
5. Criteria for identifying stalls and upsets  • • 
H. System malfunction  
(including immediate handling and subsequent operational considerations, as applicable)  
1. Flight control defects  • • 
2. Engine failure (partial or full)  • • 
3. Instrument failures  • • 
4. Loss of reliable airspeed (see also point (lb) of this AMC)  • • 
5. Automation failures  • • 
6. Fly-by-wire (FBW) protection degradations  • • 
7. Stall protection system failures including icing alerting systems  • • 
 
(lb) Flight path management (manual or automatic, as appropriate) during unreliable airspeed 
indication and other failures at high altitude in aeroplanes with a maximum cruising altitude 
above FL300  
The following training elements should be integrated into type rating training courses for 
aeroplanes with a maximum cruising altitude above FL300:  
 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1774 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1775  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Element  TK instruction  FSTD / Aeroplane 
training  
Basic flight physics principles concerning flight at high altitude, with a 
particular emphasis on the relative proximity of the critical Mach 
number and the stall, pitch behaviour, and an understanding of the 
reduced stall angle of attack when compared wit h low altitude flight.  • • 
Interaction of the automation (autopilot, flight director, auto -
throttle/auto -thrust) and the consequences of failures inducing 
disconnection of the automation.  • • 
Consequences of an unreliable airspeed and other failures indication at 
high altitude and the need for the flight crew to promptly identify the 
failure and react with appropriate (minimal) control inputs to keep the 
aircraft in a safe envelope.  • • 
Degradation of FBW flight control laws/modes and its consequence on 
aircraft stability and flight envelope protections, including stall 
warnings.  • • 
Practical training, using appropriate simulators, on manual handling at 
high altitude in normal and in non -normal flight control laws/modes, 
with particular emphasis on pre -stall buffet, the reduced stall angle of 
attack when compared with low altitude flight, and the effect of pitch 
inputs on the aircraft trajectory and energy state.   • 
The requirement to promptly and accurately apply the stall recovery 
procedure, as provided by the aircraft manufacturer, at the first 
indication of an impending stall. Differences between high -altitude and 
low-altitude stalls must be addressed.  • • 
Procedures for taking over and transferring manual control of the 
aircraft, especially for FBW aeroplanes with independent side -sticks.  • • 
Task sharing and crew coordination in high workload/stress conditions 
with appropriate call -out and acknowledgement to confirm changes to 
the aircraft flight control law/mode.  • • 
 
SKILL TEST  
(m) Upon completion of the flight training, the pilot will be required to undergo a skill test with an 
examiner to demonstrate adequate competency of aircraft operation for issue of the type 
rating. The skill test should be separate from the flight training s yllabus, and provision for it 
cannot be included in the minimum requirements or training hours of the agreed flight training 
programme. The skill test may be conducted in an FFS, the aeroplane or, in exceptional 
circum stances, a combination of both.  
COURSE COMPLETION CERTIFICATE  
(n) The HT, or a nominated representative, should certify that all training has been carried out 
before an applicant undertakes a skill test for the type rating to be included in the pilot’s licence. 
If an ATO is unable to provide certain elements of the trai ning that is required to be carried out 
on an aircraft the ATO may issue such a certificate confirming the completion of the ground 
train ing or the training in an FSTD.  
AMC3 ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
TYPE RATING COURSES – HELICOPTERS  
(a) Introduction  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1775 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1776  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) when developing the training programme for a type rating course, in addition to 
complying with the standards included in the OSD as established in accordance with 
Regulation (EC) 1702/2003 for the applicable type, the ATO should also follow any further 
recommendations contained therein.  
(2) the course should, as far as possible, provide for integrated ground, FSTD and flight 
training designated to enable the student to operate safely and qualify for the grant of a 
type rating. The course should be directed towards a helicopter type, but where  variants 
exist, all flying and ground training forming the basis of the course should relate to a 
single variant.  
(b) Variants  
(1) Familiarisation training: where a helicopter type rating also includes variants of the same 
aircraft type requiring familiarisation training, the additional familiarisation training may 
be included in the theoretical knowledge training of the initial type rating course.   
(2) Differences training: where a helicopter type rating also includes variants of the same 
aircraft type for which difference training is required, the initial training course should be 
directed towards a single variant. Additional training to operate other v ariants within the 
same type rating should be completed after successful completion of the initial type 
rating course, although elements of this differences training may be undertaken at 
appropriate stages of the initial course, with the agreement of t he competent authority.  
(c) Training in helicopter and FSTDs  
The training programme should specify the amounts of flight training in the helicopter type and 
in FSTDs (FFSs, flight training devices (FTDs), or other training devices (OTDs)). Where a suitable 
FFS is geographically remote from the normal training base, the competent authority may agree 
to some additional training being included in the programme at a remote facility.  
(d) Skill test  
The content of the flight training programme should be directed towards the skill test for that 
type. The practical training given in Part -FCL should be modified as necessary.  
The skill test may be completed in a helicopter, in an FFS or partially in a helicopter and in an 
FSTD. The use of an FSTD for skill tests is governed by the level of approval of the flight simulator 
and the previous experience of the candidate. Where an F STD is not available, abnormal 
operations of systems should not be practised in a helicopter other than as allowed for in the 
skill test form for the type.  
(e) Phase progress tests and final theoretical knowledge examination  
Prior to the final theoretical knowledge examination covering the whole syllabus, the training 
programme should provide for phase progress tests associated with each phase of theoretical 
knowledge instruction. The phase progress tests should assess the can didate’s knowledge on 
completion of each phase of the training programme.  
(f) Facilities: ground school equipment, training facilities and aids  
The ATO should provide, as a minimum, facilities for classroom instruction. Additional 
classroom training aids and equipment including, where appropriate, computers, should reflect 
the content of the course and the complexity of the helicopter. For multi -engine and multi -pilot 
helicopters, the minimum level of ground training aids should include equipment that provides 
a realistic cockpit working environment. Task analysis and the latest state -of–the-art training 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1776 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1777  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
technology is encouraged and should be fully incorporated into the training facilities wherever 
possible. Facilities for self and supervised testing should be available to the student.  
(g) Training devices  
An FTD or OTD may be provided to supplement classroom training in order to enable students 
to practice and consolidate theoretical instruction. Where suitable equipment is not available, 
or is not appropriate, a helicopter or flight simulator of the releva nt variant should be available. 
If an FTD represents a different variant of the same helicopter type for which the student is 
being trained, then differences or familiarisation training is required.  
(h) Computer -based training (CBT)  
Where CBT aids are used as a training tool, the ATO should ensure that a fully qualified ground 
instructor is available at all times when such equipment is being used by course students. Other 
than for revision periods, CBT lessons should be briefed and de briefed by a qualified ground 
instructor.  
(i) Theoretical knowledge instruction  
The theoretical knowledge instruction training should meet the general objectives of giving the 
student:  
(1) a thorough knowledge of the helicopter structure, transmissions, rotors and equipment, 
powerplant and systems, and their associated limitations;  
(2) a knowledge of the positioning and operation of the cockpit controls and indicators for 
the helicopter and its systems;  
(3) a knowledge of performance, flight planning and monitoring, mass and balance, servicing 
and optional equipment items;  
(4) an understanding of system malfunctions, their effect on helicopter operations and 
interaction with other systems; and  
(5) the understanding of normal, abnormal and emergency procedures and giving the 
student the understanding of potential control problems near the edge of the handling 
envelope. In particular, the phenomenon of ‘servo transparency’ (also known as ‘jack 
stall’)  should be covered for those helicopter types where it is a known problem.  
The amount of time and the contents of the theoretical instruction will depend on the 
complexity of the helicopter type involved and, to some extent, on the previous 
experience of the student.  
(j) Flight training  
(1) FSTDs  
The level of qualification and the complexity of the type will determine the amount of 
practical training that may be accomplished in an FSTD, including completion of the skill 
test. Prior to undertaking the skill test, a student should demonstrate compete ncy in the 
skill test items during the practical training.  
(2) Helicopter (with FSTD )  
With the exception of courses approved for ZFTT, the amount of flight time in a helicopter 
should be adequate for completion of the skill test.  
(3) Helicopters (without FSTD)  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1777 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1778  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Whenever a helicopter is used for training, the amount of flight time practical training 
should be adequate for the completion of the skill test. The amount of flight training will 
depend on the complexity of the helicopter type involved and, to some exten t, on the 
previous experience of the applicant.  
AMC4 ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
FLIGHT TEST TRAINING COURSES – AEROPLANES AND HELICOPTERS  
(a) Introduction  
(1) The flight test training course should, as far as possible, provide for a continuous process 
of ground and flight training to enable the student to assimilate the knowledge and skills 
required to conduct flight testing safely and efficiently. The student’ s ability to do this 
should be determined by the demonstration of a satisfactory level of theoretical 
knowledge of flight testing determined by progressive checking of knowledge and 
examination and progressive assessment by the ATO during flying trainin g. There should 
be no difference in the level of knowledge or competency required of the student, 
irrespective of the intended role of the student as test pilot or other flight test personnel 
(for example, flight test engineer) within the flight crew.  
(2) The flight test training course should normally be conducted as a single, full -time  course 
of study and training.  
(b) Programme of theoretical knowledge and flight training  
(1) The training programme should specify the time allocated to theoretical knowledge 
training and flying training.  
(2) If the ATO wishes to provide a flight test training course that includes credit for previous 
experience on flight testing activity, the entry requirements to such courses should be 
specified by the ATO and should define the minimum level of experience and  qualification 
required of the flight test crew member.  
GROUND TRAINING  
(c) Syllabus  
(1) The ground training syllabus should provide for the student to gain a thorough 
understanding of flight testing techniques.  
(d) Theoretical knowledge instruction  
(1) The theoretical knowledge instruction training should give the student a thorough 
knowledge of the academic requirements of flight testing.  
(e) Facilities and training aids  
(1) The ATO should provide adequate facilities for classroom instruction and have available 
appropriately qualified and experienced instructors. Training aids should enable students 
to gain practical experience of flight testing covered by the theoretical kno wledge 
syllabus and enable such practical application of the knowledge to be carried out in a 
multicrew environment. Facilities should be made available for student selfstudy outside 
the formal training programme.  
(f) Computer -based training (CBT)  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1778 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1779  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) CBT provides a valuable source of theoretical instruction, enabling the student to 
progress at his/her own pace within specified time limits. Many such systems ensure that 
syllabus subjects are fully covered and progress can be denied until a satisfactory 
assimilation of knowledge has been demonstrated. Such systems may allow self -study or 
distance learning, if they incorporate adequate knowledge testing procedures. When CBT 
is used as part of the theoretical knowledge instruction phase, the student should also 
have access to a suitably qualified instructor able to assist with areas of difficulty for the 
student.  
(g) Self-study and distance learning  
(1) Elements of the theoretical knowledge syllabus may be adequately addressed by distance 
learning, if approved, or self -study, particularly when utilising CBT. Progress testing, 
either by self -assessed or instructor -evaluated means, should be included in an y self -
study programme. If self -study or distance learning is included in the theoretical 
knowledge training, the course should also provide for an adequate period of supervised 
consolidation and knowledge testing prior to the commencement of flight tra ining.  
(h) Progress tests and final theoretical knowledge examination  
(1) The theoretical knowledge training programme should provide for progressive testing of 
the assimilation of the required knowledge. This testing process should also provide for 
retesting of syllabus items so that a thorough understanding of the required kn owledge 
is assured. This should be achieved by intervention by a qualified instructor or, if using 
CBT with a self -testing facility, and by further testing during the supervised consolidation 
phase of the ground course.  
(2) The theoretical knowledge examinations should cover all areas of the theoretical 
knowledge syllabus. The examinations should be conducted as supervised written or oral 
knowledge tests without reference to course material. The pass mark (as defined by the 
ATO) assumes the achievement of satisfactory levels of knowledge during the progressive 
phase tests of the course. The student should be advised of any areas of lack of 
knowledge displayed during the examination and, if necessary, given remedial 
instruc tion.  
FLIGHT TRAINING  
(i) Aeroplane and helicopter training  
(1) It is widely accepted that flying training normally involves inherent delay in achieving an 
acceptable flight situation and configuration for training to be carried out in accordance 
with the agreed syllabus. These could include ATC or other traffic delay  on the ground 
prior to take off, the necessity to climb to height or transit to suitable training areas and 
the unavoidable need to physically reposition the aircraft for subsequent or repeat 
manoeuvres or instrument approaches. In such cases it should  be ensured that the 
training syllabus provides adequate flexibility to enable the minimum amount of required 
flight training to be carried out.  
FINAL IN -FLIGHT EXERCISE  
(j) Upon completion of the flight test training, the test pilot or flight test engineer will be required 
to undergo in -flight exercise with a flight test instructor (FTI) to demonstrate adequate 
competency of flight testing for issue of the flight test rating . The final in -flight exercise must be 
conducted in an appropriate aeroplane or helicopter (as applicable).  
COURSE COMPLETION CERTIFICATE  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1779 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1780  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(k) The HT is required to certify that the applic ant has successfully completed the training course.  
GM1 ORA.ATO.125 Training programme  
ED Decision 2019/005/ R 
UPSET PREVENTION AND RECOVERY TRAINING (UPRT)  
(a) General  
The objective of the UPRT is to ensure that pilots are competent to prevent or recover from a 
developing or developed aeroplane upset. Prevention training prepares pilots to avoid upsets 
whereas recovery training prepares pilots to prevent an accident once an upset condition has 
developed.  
(b) Human factors  
Threat and Error Management (TEM) and Crew Resource Management (CRM) principles should 
be integrated into the UPRT. In particular, the surprise and startle effect as well as the 
importance of resilience development should be emphasised.  
Training should also emphasise that an actual upset condition may expose pilots to significant 
physiological and psychological challenges, such as visual illusions, spatial disorientation and 
unusual G -forces, with the objective of developing strategies to  deal with such challenges.  
(c) Development of training scenarios  
During the development of training scenarios, the ATO should ensure that all of the following is 
avoided:  
(a) negative training and negative transfer of training; and  
(b) training utilising predictive scenarios.  
Please refer to Revision 2 of the Airplane Upset Recovery Training Aid (AURTA) for further 
guidance on the development of training scenarios.  
(d) Additional guidance  
Specific guidance to the UPRT elements and exercises is available in:  
(1) the latest revision of the ICAO Doc 10011 ‘Manual on Aeroplane Upset Prevention and 
Recovery Training’;  
(2) Revision 3 of the Airplane Upset Prevention and Recovery Training Aid (AUPRTA); and  
(3) the Flight Safety Foundation publication ‘A Practical Guide for Improving Flight Path 
Monitoring’, November 2014.  
(e) Training platform  
(1) When designing a training course, ATOs should select aeroplanes that are suitable for all 
the required training exercises. Where certain exercises require particular capabilities, 
then an ATO may consider the use of different aeroplanes for different e xercises. 
Examples include basic UPRT or instrument flight training and the advanced UPRT course.  
(2)  For basic UPRT training conducted during the CPL or ATP courses, it is not anticipated that 
aerobatic category aeroplanes will be required or that aircraft need to be certificated for 
intentional spins. Aeroplanes with a maximum bank angle limitation may not be suitable 
for exercises such as steep turns or recovery from spiral dive.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1780 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1781  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(3) For the advanced UPRT course (FCL.745), the use of an aeroplane certificated in the 
aerobatic category will provide the greatest safety margin. Aeroplanes certificated in the 
normal or utility category may also be suitable provided the exercises used d uring the 
training take into account the capabilities of the aeroplane and are planned to remain 
within the training envelope for the aeroplane, as determined by the ATO (see point (f)).  
(f) Training envelope  
The training envelope is the envelope within which all training exercises will be carried out. It 
should be specified by the ATO in terms of the range of attitudes, speed and g -loads that can 
be used for training, taking into account:  
(1) the training environment;  
(2) the capabilities of the instructors; and  
(3) in the case of training in FSTDs, the limitations of the FSTD (as per GM3 FCL.010 for the 
FSTD training envelope); and  
(4) in the case of training in aeroplanes, the capabilities and certification of the aircraft, while 
considering a margin of safety in order to ensure that unintentional deviations from the 
training envelope will not exceed aircraft limitations. Different training envelopes may be 
specified for different aeroplane types even w ithin a single training course.  
ORA.ATO.130 Training manual and operations manual  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The ATO shall establish and maintain a training manual and operations manual containing 
information and instructions to enable personnel to perform their duties and to give guidance 
to students on how to comply with course requirements.  
(b) The ATO shall make available to staff and, where appropriate, to students the information 
contained in the training manual, the operations manual and the ATO’s approval 
documentation.  
(c) In the case of ATOs providing flight test training, the operations manual shall comply with the 
requirements for the flight test operations manual, as established in Part -21. 
(d) The operations manual shall establish flight time limitation schemes for flight instructors, 
including the maximum flying hours, maximum flying duty hours and minimum rest time 
between instructional duties in accordance with Part -ORO.  
ORA.ATO.135 Training aircraft and FSTDs  
Regulation (EU) 2019/1747  
(a) The ATO shall use an adequate fleet of training aircraft or FSTDs appropriately equipped for the 
training courses provided. The fleet of aircraft shall be composed of aircraft that comply with 
all requirements defined in Regulation (EU) 2018/1139. Aircraft  that fall under points (a), (b), 
(c) or (d) of Annex I to Regulation (EU) 2018/1139, may be used for training if all of the following 
conditions are met:  
 (1)  during an evaluation process the competent authority has confirmed a level of safety 
comparable to the one defined by all essential requirements laid down in Annex II to 
Regulation (EU) 2018/1139;  
 (2)  the competent authority has authorised the use of the aircraft for training in the ATO.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1781 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1782  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) The ATO shall only provide training in FSTDs when it demonstrates to the competent authority:  
(1) the adequacy between the FSTD specifications and the related training programme;  
(2) that the FSTDs used comply with the relevant requirements of Part -FCL; 
(3) in the case of full flight simulators (FFSs), that the FFS adequately represents the relevant 
type of aircraft; and  
(4) that it has put in place a system to adequately monitor changes to the FSTD and to ensure 
that those changes do not affect the adequacy of the training programme.  
(c) If the aircraft used for the skill test is of a different type to the FFS used for the visual flight 
training, the maximum credit shall be limited to that allocated for flight and navigation 
procedures trainer II (FNPT II) for aeroplanes and FNPT II/III f or helicopters in the relevant flight 
training programme.  
(d) Flight test training organisations. Aircraft used for flight test training shall be appropriately 
equipped with flight testing instrumentation, according to the purpose of the training.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.135 Training aircraft and FSTDs  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
ALL ATOs, EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDING FLIGHT TEST TRAINING  
(a) The number of training aircraft may be affected by the availability of FSTDs.  
(b) Each training aircraft should be:  
(1) equipped as required in the training specifications concerning the course in which it is 
used;  
(2) except in the case of balloons or single -seat aircraft, fitted with primary flight controls 
that are instantly accessible by both the student and the instructor (for example dual 
flight controls or a centre control stick). Swing -over flight controls shoul d not be used.  
(c) The fleet should include, as appropriate to the courses of training:  
(1) aircraft suitably equipped to simulate instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and 
for the instrument flight training required. For flight training and testing for the 
instrument rating and the basic instrument rating (BIR) , an adequate number of IFR -
certificated aircraft should be available;  
(2) in the case of aeroplanes and sailplanes, aircraft suitable for demonstrating stalling and 
spin avoidance;   
(3) for the flight instructor (FI) training courses on aeroplanes and sailplanes, aircraft suitable 
for spin recovery at the developed stage;  
(4) in the case of helicopters, helicopters suitable for autorotation demonstration;  
(5) in the case of a non -complex ATO, one aircraft fulfilling all the required characteristics for 
a training  aircraft might be sufficient;  
(6) each FSTD should be equipped as required in the training specifications concerning t he 
course in which it is used.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1782 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1783  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
AMC2  ORA.ATO.135 Training aircraft and FSTDs  
ED Decision 2020/005/R  
EVALUATION PROCESS  
Two cases for the evaluation process of Annex -I aircraft are distinguished:  
(a) Annex -I aircraft that hold an ICAO -level certificate of airworthiness (CoA)  
(1) To support the evaluation process performed by the competent authority and provide 
the competent authority with sufficient data related to the aircraft in question, an 
instructor who is qualified in accordance with Annex  I (Part -FCL) to Regulation (EU) 
No 1187/2011 and nominated by the head of training (HT) of the ATO should assess that 
the aircraft is appropriately equipped and suitable for the training courses provi ded. The 
result of this assessment should be submitted to the competent authority and m ay be 
included already in the application for the authorisation . 
(2) During the evaluation process, the competent authority should consider aircraft that hold 
a CoA issued in accordance with Annex 8 to the Chicago Convention to provide a level of 
safety comparable to that required by Annex  II to the Basic Regulation, unless the 
competent authority determines that the airworthiness requirements  used for 
certification of the aircraft, or the service experience, or the safety system of the State of 
design, do not provide for a comparable level of safety . 
(b) Annex -I aircraft that do not hold an ICAO -level CoA  
Before the inclusion of these aircraft in the fleet of an ATO and their use in training to obtain 
Part-FCL licences and ratings, the ATO should apply for the authorisation to the competent 
authority that should perform the evaluation process in the following order:  
(1) Initial assessment by the competent authority and criteria taken into consideration  
The competent authority should take into account the following criteria (non -exhaustive 
list):  
(i) national airworthiness requirements based on which the aircraft CoA was issued;  
(ii) aircraft similarities to a certified variant;  
(iii) aircraft with a satisfactory in -service experience as training aircraft;  
(iv) simple and conventional aircraft design;  
(v) aircraft that does not have hazardous design features or details, judging by 
experience; and  
(vi) operable aircraft systems, equipment, and appliances that do not require 
exceptional skills or strength.  
(2) Additional assessment by a qualified instructor  
To support the evaluation process performed by the competent authority and provide 
the competent authority with sufficient data related to the aircraft in question, after the 
positive initial assessment by the competent authority as per point (1), an instr uctor who 
is qualified in accordance with Part -FCL and nominated by the HT of the ATO should show 
through an evaluation report that the aircraft is appropriately equipped and suitable for 
the training courses provided. That evaluation report should conside r all of the following 
criteria:  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1783 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1784  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(i) the aircraft should be safely controllable and manoeuvrable under all anticipated 
operating conditions, including after failure of one or more propulsion systems;  
(ii) the aircraft should allow for a smooth transition from one flight phase to another 
without requiring exceptional piloting skills, alertness, strength, or workload under 
any probable operating conditions;  
(iii) the aircraft should have sufficient stability to ensure that the demands made on 
the pilot are not excessive, considering the phase and duration of flight; and  
(iv) the assessment should take into account control forces, flight deck environment, 
pilot workload, and other human factors (HF) considerations, depending on the 
phase and duration of flight.  
Subject to a positive evaluation report as per point (2), the competent authority should 
issue the authorisation.  
ORA.ATO.140 Aerodromes and operating sites  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
When providing flight training on an aircraft, the ATO shall use aerodromes or operating sites that 
have the appropriate  facilities and characteristics to allow training of the manoeuvres relevant, taking 
into account the training provided and the category and type of aircraft used.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.140 Aerodromes and operating sites  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
GENERAL  
(a) Except in the case of balloons, the base aerodrome or operating site and any alternative base 
aerodromes at which flight training is being conducted should have at least the following 
facilities:  
(1) at least one runway or final approach and take -off area (FATO) that allows training aircraft 
to make a normal take -off or landing within the performance limits of all the aircraft used 
for the training flights.  
(2) a wind direction indicator that is visible at ground level from the ends of each runway or 
at the appropriate holding points;  
(3) adequate runway electrical lighting if used for night training;   
(4) an air traffic service, except for uncontrolled aerodromes or operating sites where the 
training requirements may be satisfied safely by another acceptable means of air -to-
ground communication.  
(b) Except in the case of ATOs providing flight test training, in addition to (a), for helicopters, 
training sites should be available for:  
(1) confined area operation training;  
(2) simulated engine off autorotation; and  
(3) sloping ground operation.  
(c) In the case of balloons, the take -off sites used by the ATO should allow a normal take -off and 
clearing of all obstacles in the take -off flight path by at least 50 ft.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1784 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1785  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
ORA.ATO.145 Pre -requisites for training  
Regulation (EU) No 70/2014  
(a) The ATO shall ensure that the students meet all the pre -requisites for training established in 
Part-Medical, Part - FCL, and, if applicable, as defined in the mandatory part of the operational 
suitability data established in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 748/2012.  
(b) In the case of ATOs providing flight test training, the students shall meet all the pre -requisites 
for training established in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 748/2012.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.145 Pre -requisites for training  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS  
ATOs providing training for other than the LAPL, PPL, SPL or BPL and the associated ratings and 
certificates should establish entrance requirements for students in their procedures. The entrance 
requirements should ensure that the students have enough know ledge, particularly of physics and 
mathematics, to be able to follow the courses.  
ORA.ATO.150 Training in third countries  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
When the ATO is approved to provide training for the instrument rating (IR) in third countries:  
(a) the training programme shall include acclimatisation flying in one of the Member States before 
the IR skill test is taken; and  
(b) the IR skill test shall be taken in one of the Member States.


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1785 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1786  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
SECTION  II – ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ATO S PROVIDING TRAINING 
FOR CPL,  MPL  AND ATPL  AND THE ASSOCIATED RATINGS AND CERTIFICATES  
ORA.ATO.210 Personnel requirements  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) Head of training (HT). Except in the case of ATOs providing flight test training, the nominated 
HT shall have extensive experience in training as an instructor for professional pilot licences and 
associated ratings or certificates.  
(b) Chief flight instructor (CFI). The ATO providing flight instruction shall nominate a CFI who shall 
be responsible for the supervision of flight and flight simulation training instructors and for the 
standardisation of all flight instruction and flight sim ulation instruction. The CFI shall hold the 
highest professional pilot licence and associated ratings related to the flight training courses 
conducted and hold an instructor certificate with the privilege to instruct for at least one of the 
training cou rses provided.  
(c) Chief theoretical knowledge instructor (CTKI). The ATO providing theoretical knowledge 
instruction shall nominate a CTKI who shall be responsible for the supervision of all theoretical 
knowledge instructors and for the standardisation of all theoretical k nowledge instruction. The 
CTKI shall have extensive experience as a theoretical knowledge instructor in the areas relevant 
for the training provided by the ATO.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.210 Personnel requirements  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
GENERAL  
(a) The management structure should ensure supervision of all grades of personnel by persons 
having the experience and qualities necessary to ensure the maintenance of high standards. 
Details of the management structure, indicating individual responsibilities, should be included 
in the ATOs operations manual.  
(b) The ATO should demonstrate to the competent authority that an adequate number of qualified, 
competent staff is employed.  
(c) In the case of an ATO offering integrated courses, the head of training ( HT), the chief flying 
instructor (CFI) and the chief theoretical -knowledge instructor (CTKI) should be employed full -
time or part -time, depending upon the scope of training offered. The three positions of HT, CFI, 
and CTKI should not be combined but should be filled by three persons.  
(d) In all other cases the positions of HT, CFI and CTKI may be combined and filled by one or two 
persons with extensive experience in the training conducted by the training organisation, full -
time or part -time, depending upon the scope of training offered , provided that the organisation 
has demonstrated to the competent authority the adequacy of such personnel set -up for its 
organisation (point ORA.GEN.200 (b)). 
(e) In the case of an ATO that provides flight training only, no CTKI function is required in the ATO. 
In the case of an ATO that provides theoretical -knowledge instruction only, no CFI function is 
required in the ATO.  
(f) The ratio of all students to all flight instructors, excluding the HT, should not exceed 6:1.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1786 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1787  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(g) Classes in ground subjects that require maximal supervision or intensive practical work should 
not include more than 28 students.  
THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE INSTRUCTORS  
(h) The theoretical knowledge instruction for type or class ratings should be conducted by 
instructors holding the appropriate type or class rating, or having appropriate experience in 
aviation and knowledge of the aircraft concerned.  
(i) For this purpose, a flight engineer, a maintenance engineer or a flight operations officer should 
be considered as having appropriate experience in aviation and knowl edge of the aircraft 
concerned.  
AMC2 ORA.ATO.210 Personnel requirements  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
QUALIFICATION OF HEAD OF TRAINING AND CHIEF FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR  
(a) Head of training (HT)  
The nominated HT should hold or have held in the 3 years prior to first appointment as HT, a 
professional  pilot licence and associated ratings or certificates issued in accordance with Part -
FCL, related to the flight training courses provided.  
(b) Chief flight instructor (CFI)  
(1) The CFI may delegate standardisation and supervision to the flight instructors. In all cases 
it is the CFI who is ultimately responsible for ensuring quality and standards.  
(2) The CFI should, except in the case of ATOs providing flight test training, have c ompleted 
1 000 hours of flight time as pilot -in-command (PIC).  
At least 500 of those hours should be on flying instructional duties related to the flying 
courses provided, of which 200 hours may be instrument ground time.  
ORA.ATO.225 Training programme  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The training programme shall include a breakdown of flight and theoretical knowledge 
instruction, presented in a week -by-week or phase layout, a list of standard exercises and a 
syllabus summary.  
(b) The content and sequence of the training programme shall be specified in the training manual.  
ORA.ATO.230 Training manual and operations manual  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) The training manual shall state the standards, objectives and training goals for each phase of 
training that the students are required to comply with and shall address the following subjects:  
— training plan,  
— briefing and air exercises,  
— flight training in  an FSTD, if applicable,  
— theoretical knowledge instruction . 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1787 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1788  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) The operations manual shall provide relevant information to  particular groups of personnel, as 
flight instructors, flight simulation training instructors, theoretical knowledge instructors, 
operations and maintenance personnel, and shall include general, technical, route and staff 
training information.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
TRAINING MANUAL  
Training manua ls for use at an ATO to conduct integrated or modular flight training courses should 
include the following:  
(a) The training plan:  
(1) The aim of the course (ATP, 
CPL/IR, CPL, etc. as applicable)  A statement of what the student is expected to do as a result of the 
training, the level of performance, and the training constraints to be 
observed.  
(2) Pre-entry requirements  (i) Minimum age, educational requirements (including language), 
medical requirements;  
(ii) Any individual Member State requirements.  
(3) Credits for previous 
experience  To be obtained from the competent authority before training begins.  
(4) Training syllabi  As applicable, the flying syllabus (single -engine or multiengine, as 
applicable), the flight simulation training syllabus and the theoretical 
knowledge training syllabus.  
(5) The time scale and scale, in 
weeks, for each syllabus  Arrangements of the course and the integration of syllabi time.  
(6) Training programme  (i) The general arrangements of daily and weekly programmes for 
flying, theoretical knowledge training and training in FSTDs, if 
applicable;  
(ii) Bad weather constraints;  
(iii) Programme constraints in terms of maximum student training 
times, (flying, theoretical knowledge, on FSTDs), for example per 
day, week or month;  
(iv) Restrictions in respect of duty periods for students;  
(v) Duration of dual and solo flights at various stages;  
(vi) Maximum fly ing hours in any day or night;  
(vii) Maximum number of training flights in any day or night;  
(viii)  Minimum rest period between duty periods.  
(7) Training records  (i) Rules for security of records and documents;  
(ii) Attendance records;  
(iii) The form of training records to be kept;  
(iv) Persons responsible for checking records and students’ log books;  
(v) The nature and frequency of record checks;  
(vi) Standardisation of entries in training records; (vii) Rules concerning 
log book entries.  
(8) Safety training  (i) Individual responsibilities;  
(ii) Essential exercises;  
(iii) Emergency drills (frequency);  
(iv) Dual checks (frequency at various stages);  
(v) Requirement before first solo day, night or navigation etc. if 
applicable.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1788 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1789  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(9) Assessments, t ests and 
examinations  (i) Flying:   
 (A)  progress checks;  
 (B)  skill tests.  
(ii) Theoretical knowledge:  
 (A)  progress tests;  
 (B)  theoretical knowledge examinations.  
 (C)  Area 100 KSA assessments.   
(iii) Authorisation for test;  
(iv) Rules concerning refresher training before retest;  
(v) Test and assessment reports and records;  
(vi) Procedures for examination paper preparation, type of question 
and assessment, standard required for ‘pass’;  
(vii) Procedure for question analysis and review and for raising 
replacement papers;  
(viii)  Examination resit procedures.  
(10) Training effectiveness  (i) Individual responsibilities;  
(ii) General assessment;  
(iii) Liaison between departments;  
(iv) Identification of unsatisfactory progress (individual students);  
(v) Actions to correct unsatisfactory progress;  
(vi) Procedure for changing instructors;  
(vii) Maximum number of instructor changes per student;  
(viii)  Internal feedback system for detecting training deficiencies;  
(ix) Procedure for suspending a student from training;  
(x) Discipline;  
(xi) Reporting and documentation.  
(11) Standards and level of 
performance at various 
stages  (i) Individual responsibilities;  
(ii) Standardisation;  
(iii) Standardisation requirements and procedures;  
(iv) Application of test criteria.  
 
(b) Briefing and air exercises:  
(1) Air exercise  A detailed statement of the content specification of all the air exercises 
to be taught, arranged in the sequence to be flown with main and 
subtitles.   
(2) Air exercise reference list  An abbreviated list of the above exercises giving only main and 
subtitles for quick reference, and preferably in flip -card form to 
facilitate daily use by instructors.  
(3) Course structure:  
 phase of training  A statement of how the course will be divided into phases, indication of 
how the above air exercises will be divided between the phases and 
how they will be arranged to ensure that they are completed in the 
most suitable learning sequence and that essentia l (emergency) 
exercises are repeated at the correct frequency. Also, the syllabus 
hours for each phase and for groups of exercises within each phase 
should be stated and when progress tests are to be conducted, etc.  
(4) Course structure:  
 integration of syllabi  The manner in which theoretical knowledge and flight training in an 
aircraft or an FSTD will be integrated so that as the flying training 
exercises are carried out students will be able to apply the knowledge 
gained from the associated theoretical knowledg e instruction and flight 
training.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1789 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1790  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(5) Student progress  The requirement for student progress and include a brief but specific 
statement of what a student is expected to be able to do and the 
standard of proficiency he/she must achieve before progressing from 
one phase of air exercise training to the next. Inclu de minimum 
experience requirements in terms of hours, satisfactory exercise 
completion, etc. as necessary before significant exercises, for example 
night flying.  
(6) Instructional methods  The ATO requirements, particularly in respect of pre - and postflying 
briefing, adherence to syllabi and training specifications, authorisation 
of solo flights, etc.  
(7) Progress tests  The instructions given to examining staff in respect of the conduct and 
documentation of all progress tests.  
(8) Glossary of terms  Definition of significant terms as necessary.  
(9) Appendices  (i) Progress test report forms;  
(ii) Skill test report forms;  
(iii) ATO certificates of experience, competence, etc. as required.  
 
(c) Flight training in an FSTD, if applicable: Structure generally as for (b)  
(d) Theoretical knowledge instruction:  
(1) Structure of the theoretical 
knowledge course  A statement of the structure of the course, including the general 
sequence of the topics to be taught in each subject, the time allocated 
to each topic, the breakdown per subject and an example of a course 
schedule. Distance learning courses should include  instructions of the 
material to be studied for individual elements of the course.  
(2) Lesson plans  A description of each lesson or group of lessons including teaching 
materials, training aids, progress test organisation and inter -connection 
of topics with other subjects.  
(3) Teaching materials  Specification of the training aids to be used (for example study 
materials, course manual references, exercises, self -study materials, 
demonstration equipment).  
(4) Student progress  The requirement for student progress, including a brief but specific 
statement of the standard that must be achieved and the mechanism 
for achieving this, before application for theoretical knowledge 
examinations.  
(5) Progress testing  The organisation of progress testing in each subject, including topics 
covered, evaluation methods and documentation.  
(6) Review procedure  The procedure to be followed if the standard required at any stage of 
the course is not achieved, including an agreed action plan with 
remedial training if required.   
(7) Appendices  (i) Examples of Area 100 KSA summative assessments;  
(ii) Area 100 KSA mental maths test example.  
 
AMC2 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE COURSE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS  
An ATO that delivers theoretical knowledge instruction for professional pilot licences should ensure 
that:  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1790 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1791  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(a)  the courses are designed and developed using the instructional systems design (ISD) 
methodology, which is supported by a robust and effective management system;  
(b)  the courses include a standardised and dynamic assessment and testing system;  
(c)  instructors that deliver KSA instruction have received appropriate training covering at least 
learning styles, teaching methods, facilitation techniques, threat and error management (TEM), 
the applicable competencies, and the content of the subject(s) and  exercises that they are to 
deliver;  
(d)  the recurrent training of instructors is conducted at least annually;  
(e)  the instructors that are responsible for assessing Area 100 KSA have received appropriate 
training regarding the assessment(s) that they are to conduct, and are to be standardised to 
ensure that the assessment grades awarded are consistent across the ATO; this standardisation 
should include at least familiarisation with the performance indicators, the ATO’s word pictures 
for grading, and the ATO’s debriefing system; and  
(f)  recurrent standardisation training is conducted at least annually to ensure con tinued inter -rater 
reliability.  
AMC3 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
AREA KSA 100 02 AND 100 03 LEARNING OBJECTIVES, ASSESSMENTS AND RECORDS  
(a)  An ATO that delivers theoretical knowledge instruction for professional pilot licences should 
ensure that for the learning objectives (LOs) in topics 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA there 
are at least two summative assessments and at least one formative assessment. The summative 
assessments are to be documented in the student’s training records. Both the summative 
assessments and the formative assessment(s) should be debriefed.  
(b)  The formative assessment(s) should:  
(1)  be designed such that the student has the opportunity to ask questions and develop 
competencies in most of the LOs in 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA;  
(2)  be conducted during the training; the ATO may in addition conduct a formative 
evaluation (continuous assessment) over a specified phase of the course; and  
(3) be conducted by an instructor that is trained to deliver the formative assessment.  
(c)  The summative assessments should:  
(1)  be designed so that they collectively give the student the opportunity to demonstrate 
competency in all LOs in 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA; each individual summative 
assessment may address some of the LOs in 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA;  
(2)  be satisfactorily completed before the student is recommended by the ATO for their first 
attempt to take the final theoretical knowledge examination paper, and the outcome of 
the assessments should be included in the student’s training record;  
(3)  require that for a student to be considered that they have achieved a ‘Satisfactory’ 
standard, they:  
(i)  meet at least 35 % (which defines the term ‘some’ used in the word pictures) of 
the indicators relevant to the assessment exercise, in each competency;  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1791 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1792  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(ii)  have an overall positive effect on the outcome or completion of the exercise 
without any external input from the instructor, or where the assessment requires 
the instructor to facilitate the exercise, without the instructor providing any 
knowledge or corre ctive input to assist in the completion of the exercise; and  
(4)  be conducted by an instructor that is trained to deliver the summative assessments.  
(d)  The training manual should include the following elements regarding the theoretical knowledge 
training and assessment of the LOs in topics 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA:  
(1)  the positions, or range of positions, of the formative assessment exercise(s) and 
summative assessment exercises in the training programme;  
(2)  a description of the summative assessments, including a matrix that shows which Area 
100 KSA LOs are covered in each exercise;  
(3) the grading system of the Area 100 KSA summative assessment and a description of the 
ATO’s minimum required standard;  
(4)  the template for the information about Area 100 KSA to be included in the student’s 
training record, which should include at least the dates and result (‘Pass’ or ‘Fail’) of the 
summative assessments and the date and score of the mental maths test;  
(5) the method of assessment debrief for each summative and formative assessment;  
(6)  for a student who performs below the satisfactory standard in a summative 
assessment(s), the method to further develop the student’s competencies and h ow to 
conduct the reassessment.  
(e)  Access to the information on Area 100 KSA kept in the student’s training records should 
be restricted to the student and authorised ATO personnel, and should not be disclosed 
outside the ATO. The information on the record should first be de -identified befo re it is 
used to support course design improvements.  
AMC4 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
AREA 100 04 LEARNING OBJECTIVES: MENTAL MATHS TEST AND RECORDS  
(a)  An ATO that delivers theoretical knowledge instruction for professional pilot licences should 
ensure that at least one KSA mental maths test is conducted and the outcome(s) documented 
in the student’s training records.  
(b)  The mental maths test(s) may be written or oral in format and should, where possible, be 
scenario -based, with at least two questions per LO in topic 100 04 of Area 100 KSA.  
(c)  The minimum score to pass the Area 100 KSA mental maths test(s) should be 75 % of the marks 
allocated to a test. However, a higher pass mark may be defined by the ATO.  
(d)  The mental maths test(s) should be satisfactorily completed before the student is 
recommended by the ATO for their first attempt to take their final theoretical knowledge 
examination paper.  
GM1 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
ASSESSMENT OF STUDENTS IN AREA 100 KSA  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1792 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1793  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(a)  The Area 100 KSA formative assessment(s) and summative assessments may include but not be 
limited to: written planning exercises combining multiple subjects; practical exercises using 
training devices (if available); scenario -based oral board (viva voce); scenario -based 
communications exercises; written assignments or project work; and preparation and delivery 
of group or individual presentations.  
(b)  The format of formative and summative assessment debriefs should be effective, highlighting 
the student’s strengths and weaknesses an d enabling future improvement.  
GM2 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
AREA 100 KSA WORD PICTURES  
(a) ‘Word pictures’ are a proven assessment tool that standardises pilot core competencies, and 
can be used to assess student’s competency in the Area 100 KSA LOs in topics 100 02 and 100 
03. Word pictures describe the student’s performance. Each word picture is associated with a 
numerical grade; within the range of grades, the minimum acceptable standard is defined. 
Additionally, a word picture describing performance that falls below the minimum satisfactory 
standard should be included in the range, as wel l as additional word pictures that relate to 
grades which exceed this minimum satisfactory standard.  
Word pictures enable the standardisation of the assessment performance and facilitate inter -
rater reliability within an ATO.  
(b) This GM provides two examp les of word pictures.  
(c) The most commonly used word pictures are shown in Section A below. They are based on 
performance indicators, which explain what the student should demonstrate in order to attain 
the specific Area 100 KSA LOs that are addressed by the assessment exercise. W ord pictures are 
formed of elements that contain the following:  
(1)  HOW MANY of the performance indicators were observed and, where relevant, HOW 
OFTEN;  
(2) HOW WELL the competency was demonstrated in the assessment exercise to have an 
overall positive effect on the outcome or completion of the assessment exercise;  
(3) the level of success in the OUTC OME of the assessment exercise.  
(d) An ATO could establish its own set of word picture descriptions as long as they are comparable 
in the grading of each competency, similar to the ‘Communication’ and ‘Application of 
knowledge, UPRT and resilience’ word pictures example in Section B below.  
(e) The advantage of word pictures is that they provide meaningful and standard data to enable 
identification of individual, crew, class, instructor and ATO trends, which can be analysed in 
order to provide feedback for further improvement or development.  
(f) An ATO should ensure that the detailed information obtained through its grading in Area 100 
KSA is de -identified before using it to support course improvement.  
SECTION A — EXAMPLE 1  
AREA 100 KSA WORD PICTURE GRADE LEVELS (USING INDICATORS)  
(g) The example shown below in this Section contains the most commonly used word pictures, 
which are formed of elements that contain the following:  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1793 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1794  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) HOW MANY of the performance indicators in the table further below relevant to that 
summative assessment were observed in that competency (as a percentage);  
(2) HOW WELL the competency was demonstrated in the assessment; and  
(3) the level of success in the OUTCO ME of the summative assessment.  
(h) In order to satisfactorily complete an Area KSA 100 summative assessment, the student should 
reach at least the minimum satisfactory level in each competency covered by that assessment. 
In case the student fails to reach the minimum satisfactory level in e ach competency, the 
student should repeat the summative assessment or another summative assessment that 
covers the competency(ies) where performance was previously assessed as unsatisfactory.  
 
Table 1: Example generic competency framework that can be applied for assessing the student’s level of 
performance  
 
Competency  Level 1  
Unsatisfactory  Level 2  
Satisfactory  Level 3  
Good  Level 4  
Very good  Level 5  
Excellent  
General  
description of  
each competency  
level.  
To be applied to  
each individual  
competency in  
LOs 100 02 and  
100 03 of Area 
100 KSA.  The student’s  
performance in 
this competency 
was ineffective or  
inadequate, 
which in  relation 
to this  
competency had 
a neutral or 
negative  effect 
on others or on  
the outcome of 
the exercise.  
The student 
showed  none or 
few of the  
relevant 
performance  
indicators in this  
competency.  The student’s  
performance in 
this competency 
was satisfactory, 
which had  a 
slightly positive 
effect  on the 
satisfactory  
outcome of the  
exercise, and in 
group  situations 
had a slightly  
positive effect on  
others.  
The student 
showed at  least 
some* of the  
relevant 
performance  
indicators in this  
competency.  The student’s  
performance in 
this competency 
was effective, 
which in the  case 
of an exercise  
where the 
student is  the 
only participant,  
significantly  
contributed to a 
good  outcome.  In 
group situations,  
the student’s  
contribution had 
a good effect on 
others  and 
significantly  
contributed to 
the overall 
outcome of the  
exercise.  
The student 
showed  most of 
the relevant  
performance  
indicators to a 
good  standard.  The student’s  
performance in 
this competency 
was highly 
effective,  which 
in the case of  an 
exercise where  
the student is the  
only participant,  
significantly  
enhanced the 
very  good 
outcome.  In 
group situations,  
the student’s  
contribution had 
a very good 
effect on  others 
and significantly  
enhanced the 
overal l outcome 
of the  exercise.  
The student 
showed  most or 
all of the  relevant  
performance  
indicators to a 
very  good 
standard.  The student’s  
performance in 
this competency 
was exemplary, 
which in  the case 
of an  exercise 
where the  
student is the 
only  participant, 
had an  
outstanding 
effect  on the 
excellent  
outcome of the  
exercise. In group  
situations, the  
student’s  
contribution had 
an excellent 
effect on  others 
and had an  
outstanding 
effect  on the 
overall  outcome 
of the  exercise.  
The student 
showed  all of the 
relevant  
performance  
indicators to an  
excellent 
standard.  
* ‘Some’ is defined as showing at least 35 % of the performance indicators in that competency, which were relevant to 
that exercise.  
 
AREA 100 KSA ASSESSMENT PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1794 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1795  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(i) The performance indicators that relate to the LOs in topics 100 02 and 100 03 of Area 100 KSA 
can be used to form a word picture.  
 
Table 2: Performance indicators relevant to the LOs in topics 100 02 to 100 03 of Area 100 KSA  
Competency  Competency description  Indicators  
Communication  Demonstrates effective  oral, non -verbal and  
written communication  skills in classroom 
exercise  and assessment situations  — Ensures the recipient is ready and prepared 
to receive the information.  
— Selects appropriately what, when, how and 
with whom to communicate.  
— Conveys messages clearly, accurately and 
concisely.  
— Confirms that the recipient correctly 
understands important information.  
— Listens actively and demonstrates 
understanding of the information they 
receive.  
— Asks relevant and effective questions.  
— Adheres to standard radio -telephony 
phraseology.  
— Accurately reads, interprets, constructs and 
responds to given documentation in English.  
— Correctly interprets non -verbal 
communication.  
— Uses eye contact, body language and 
gestures that are consistent with and 
support verbal messages.  
Leadership and  
teamwork  Displays effective  leadership and teamwork.  — Creates an atmosphere of open 
communication and encourages team 
participation.  
— Uses initiative and gives directions when 
required.  
— Admits mistakes and takes responsibility.  
— Anticipates and responds appropriately to 
others’ needs.  
— Carries out instructions when directed.  
— Communicates relevant concerns and 
intentions.  
— Gives and receives feedback constructively.  
— Demonstrates empathy and shows respect 
and tolerance for others.  
— Engages others in planning and allocates 
activities fairly and appropriately according 
to abilities.  
— Addresses and resolves conflicts and 
disagreements in a constructive manner.  
— Projects self -control.  
Problem -solving  
and decision -
making  Accurately identifies risks and resolves problems.  
Uses the appropriate decision -making 
processes.  — Seeks accurate and adequate information 
from appropriate sources.  
— Identifies and verifies what and why things 
have gone wrong.  
— Employs proper problem -solving strategies.  
— Perseveres in working through problems.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1795 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1796  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
— Uses appropriate decision -making 
processes in a  timely manner.  
— Sets priorities appropriately.  
— Identifies and considers options effectively.  
— Monitors, reviews, and adapts decisions as 
required.  
— Identifies and manages risks effectively.  
Situation  
awareness  Perceives and comprehends all the relevant 
information available, anticipates what could 
happen that could affect the exercise or 
situations discussed in the classroom, and gives 
effective solutions to resolve the situation.  — Identifies and assesses accurately the 
general environment as it may affect the 
operation.  
— Identifies and manages threats, errors, and 
undesirable aircraft states.  
Workload  
management  Manages available resources or time to 
efficiently prioritise and complete or perform 
tasks in a timely manner.  — Maintains self -control.  
— Plans, prioritises and schedules tasks 
effectively.  
— Manages time efficiently when carrying out 
tasks.  
— Offers and accepts assistance, delegates 
when necessary, and asks for help early.  
— Manages and recovers from interruptions, 
distractions, variations, and failures 
effectively.  
Application of  
knowledge,  UPRT 
and resilience  Demonstrates correct and deep understanding 
of the subject(s), and is able to effectively relate 
this knowledge between subjects and apply the 
knowledge for effective threat and error 
management (TEM).  — Correctly completes pre -flight planning in 
the practical exercise.  
— Demonstrates KSA and TEM relating to 
phases of  flight in the ground training 
environment.  
— Correctly and effectively applies knowledge 
to identify and manage threats and errors 
that could  lead to a potential upset in 
scenario situations.  
— Recognises potential upset ‘threats’ and 
suggests  effective ‘threat management’ in 
scenario situations.  
— Recognises potential upset ‘errors’ and 
suggests  effective ‘error management’ in 
scenario situations.  
— Identifies the causes of and contributing 
factors to upsets in aircraft accident and 
incident reviews and in reported recovered 
situations or scenarios.  
— Is resilient, i.e. recognises and adapts to 
disruptions during scenarios and other 
exercises.  
— Identifies the signs of stress and discusses 
the effects of stress, fatigue and aviation 
lifestyle on situation awareness, including 
how to cope with these in order to maintain 
situation awareness.  
 
SECTION B — EXAMPLE 2  
AREA 100 KSA WORD PICTURES (USING DESCRIPTIONS)  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1796 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1797  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(j) An ATO may devise its own word pictures for each of the competencies, to be used alongside 
or combined with those given in EXAMPLE 1.  
A descriptive word picture typically includes descriptive examples that the ATO’s instructors 
could readily identify and then equate to given competency levels. Below are two examples (for 
‘Communication’ and ‘Application of knowledge, UPRT and resilience’ ). 
 
Table 3: Example word pictures using descriptions  
 
Competency  Level 1  
Unsatisfactory  Level 2  
Satisfactory  Level 3  
Good  Level 4  
Very good  Level 5  
Excellent  
Communication  The student’s 
performance in 
communication 
had a neutral or 
negative effect 
on the exercise or 
situation.  
The student may 
not have 
contributed to 
the exercise or 
the 
communication 
was unclear or 
insufficient.  
The student may 
have occasionally 
interrupted 
others, not 
listened, or 
showed 
frustration or 
inappropriate 
nonobjective 
communication.  
The student may 
have asked 
unrelated or 
unclear 
questions, or 
provided 
insufficient clarity 
in directions or 
comments for 
others to 
understand.  
The student may 
have written 
without structure 
or clarity.  The student’s 
written or oral 
communication 
was sufficient to 
convey the intent 
of the exercise.  
In oral 
communication 
the listener may 
have rarely 
needed to ask for 
clarification 
which the 
student then 
positively and 
clearly provided.  
The student 
listened to 
instructions but 
may have 
occasionally been 
reticent and 
hesitant to ask 
questions or 
make comments.  
The student may 
have rarely 
shown 
underconfidence 
or passiveness 
during the 
exercise. 
However, overall 
their 
communication 
was sufficient to 
ensure a positive 
outcome of the 
exercise.  The student’s 
written or oral 
communication 
was good.  
Explanations, 
discussions, 
directions and 
comments were 
well-structured 
and clear.  
The student 
listened to others 
actively and 
when unsure 
asked 
appropriate 
questions to seek 
clarification.  
The student 
showed 
appropriate 
confidence and 
open body 
language.  The student’s 
written or oral 
communication 
was consistently 
very good.  
All 
communication 
was clear, concise 
and well -
structured, which 
ensured a very 
effective 
outcome.  
In group 
situations, the 
student’s ability 
to interpret 
others’ body 
language, and the 
use of body 
language to 
ensure a positive 
outcome, was 
very effective.  
At all times the 
student was 
calm, engaged 
and confident.  The student’s 
communication 
skills were 
exemplary. At all 
times the student 
observed others 
and ensured that 
their own 
communication 
was extremely 
effective.  
In group 
situations, the 
student’s 
communication 
enabled all 
members to 
contribute to 
their greatest 
ability whilst also 
ensuring an 
excellent 
outcome of the 
exercise.  
In group 
situations, when 
appropriate, the 
student 
proactively and 
subtly managed 
the group’s mood 
or motivated the 
group members 
appropriately.  
Competency  Level 1  
Unsatisfactory  Level 2  
Satisfactory  Level 3  
Good  Level 4  
Very good  Level 5  
Excellent  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1797 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1798  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
Application of 
knowledge, UPRT 
and resilience  The student’s 
knowledge was at 
times insufficient 
or incorrect, 
which had an 
adverse effect on 
the exercise.  
The student 
displayed limited 
ability to relate 
knowledge 
between subjects 
or to apply 
knowledge to 
scenarios, 
exercises or in 
answers to 
questions.  The student had 
the minimum 
acceptable level 
of knowledge to 
complete the 
exercise to a 
satisfactory 
standard. The 
student 
occasionally 
demonstrated 
the ability to 
relate knowledge 
between 
subjects.  
The student 
could identify 
some threats or 
errors, and when 
presented with a 
threat or error 
could in most 
situations suggest 
at least one 
possible effective 
method of 
mitigation.  The student 
demonstrated a 
good level of 
knowledge with 
the ability to 
relate this 
knowledge 
effectively 
between subjects 
and in scenario 
exercises or 
situations.  
The student 
identified many 
threats and 
errors, and when 
presented with 
threats or errors 
used their 
knowledge 
effectively to 
suggest 
appropriate 
mitigations and 
actions.  The student 
demonstrated a 
very good level of 
knowledge, and 
correctly and 
readily related 
this knowledge 
across subjects 
and in scenario 
situations.  
The student 
identified most 
threats and 
errors, and 
immediately used 
their knowledge 
to manage them 
effectively.  The student had 
an excellent level 
of understanding 
which they 
immediately and 
appropriately 
applied across 
subjects and to 
the exercise or 
scenario 
situation.  
The student 
identified all 
actual threats 
and errors in 
scenario 
situations, 
anticipated some 
possible threats 
and errors (what 
if’s), and used 
their knowledge 
to manage them 
efficiently and 
very effectively.  
 
GM3 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
AREA 100 KSA EXERCISES AND ASSESSMENTS  
Exercises and assessments are to be interwoven into the theoretical knowledge training, utilising a 
range of learning styles; they should address subject or cross -subject topics, with the application of 
threat and error management (TEM) and, where possible , be scenario -based. The exercises and 
assessments do not need to be confined to a classroom.  
(a)  Area 100 KSA exercises may be of short duration within a lesson, and the student’s performance 
in the exercises does not need to be recorded, although the main subject and KSA learning 
points are likely to be discussed (or for distance learning, reviewed) within a post exercise 
debrief or lesson summary. To allow for flexibility and development, the exercises do not need 
to be specified in the training plan.  
(b)  When a single formative assessment is specified in the training plan, it is likely to be extensive 
as it will cover many of the LOs in Area KSA 100 02 and 100 03. Alternatively, an ATO may specify 
a number of shorter -duration formative assessments that eac h covers a narrower range of LOs, 
and these may build in terms of content difficulty.  
(c)  The exercises and formative and summative assessments may include but not be limited to: 
scenario planning exercises combining multiple subjects; practical exercises using training 
devices (where available); oral communication exercises; written assignment s and/or project 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1798 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1799  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
work; discussions; the preparation and delivery of group or individual presentations and 
discussions; and enable scenario -based content and individual, pair or group situation(s).  
(d) The type of assessment and the environment should be record ed in the ATO’s training plan.  
GM4 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
AREA 100 KSA INSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENT TRAINING  
(a)  The following material has been developed to provide additional guidance to organisations to 
help them develop an effective KSA 100 instruction and assessment training programme that 
satisfies the provisions in AMC2 ORA.ATO.230 (c) to (f).  
(b)  An ATO should ensure that an instructor who conducts the Area 100 KSA formative 
assessment(s) has received adequate training to be familiar with the:  
(1)  relevant competencies and performance indicators;  
(2)  Area 100 KSA Learning Objectives (LOs);  
(3)  formative  assessment(s) that they will conduct including: the applicable LOs, purpose and 
content of the assessment(s) and position(s) in the training plan, assessment resources, 
assessment environment;  
(4)  Area 100 KSA grading system, including familiarisation with the performance indicators 
and the ATO’s word pictures; and  
(5)  student debrief methods and procedure.  
(c)  An ATO should ensure that an instructor who conducts the Area 100 KSA summative 
assessments has received adequate training to be familiar with:  
(1)  the summative assessments that they will conduct including: the applicable LOs, purpose 
and content of the exercise(s) and position(s) in the training plan, assessment resources, 
assessment environment, and the minimum acceptable level;  
(2)  the assessment feedback, evaluation and development process; and  
(3) KSA candidate appeal procedure.  
(d)  An Area 100 KSA instruction and assessment course should include practical training on the 
conduct of an assessment, including grading to achieve inter -rater reliability, and the debrief  
under supervision.  
GM5 ORA.ATO.230(a) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2018/001/R  
INSTRUCTIONAL SYSTEMS DESIGN  
(a) The instructional systems design (ISD) provides a systematic and iterative process for course 
design based on educational best practices. There are several effective ISD models in use today, 
with the analyse, design, develop, implement and evaluate (ADDIE)  framework being generic to 
all. 
The purpose of using ISD to design training courses is to facilitate the students’ efficient and 
effective acquisition of knowledge and skills based on current training needs.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1799 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1800  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(b) To provide evidence of the effective use of the ISD methodology in the design and continued 
development of their course(s), an ATO may use documentation and records that relate to the 
ISD phases.  
(d) ADDIE model example. The ‘analysis’, ‘design’, ‘development’, ‘implementation’ and 
‘evaluation’ phases of the ADDIE model are shown below with brief phase descriptions.  
 
AMC1 ORA.ATO.230(b) Training manual and operations manual  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
ALL ATOs, EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDING FLIGHT TEST TRAINING  
OPERATIONS MANUAL  
The operations manual for use at an ATO conducting integrated or modular flight training courses 
should include the  following:  
(a) General:  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Analyse the training need s 
Determine the 
requirements to be fulfilled: 
required trainee standard 
at course start and how this 
is achieved (selection, or 
screening and where 
necessary pre -training).  
Design the training  course, 
tests and assessment  plan  
Includ es establishing 
objectives and performance 
indicators (including ATO  
assessment environment(s), 
standard s and procedures ). 
Design the course syllabus 
and the training and 
assessment plan.  
Develop the training and 
assessment materials   
Includes the selection of 
training methods and 
tools, the production of 
training, testing and 
assessment materials, and 
the training of instructors 
and assessors.’  Implement the course  
Delivery of the course.  
Collection of feedback 
from trainees, 
instructors and 
assessors during and 
after the course.  Evaluat e the course  
Analyse results, reports, 
feedback and data to 
dete rmine how well the 
course met its objectives. 
Determine whether 
training needs have been 
modified by using external 
inputs/data.  
Iteratively improve and 
further develop the course.  
. 
   


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1800 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1801  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(1) a list and description of all volumes in the operations manual;  
(2) administration (function and management);  
(3) responsibilities (all management and administrative staff);  
(4) student discipline and disciplinary action;  
(5) approval or authorisation of flights;  
(6) preparation of flying programme (restriction of numbers of aircraft in poor weather);  
(7) command of aircraft;  
(8) responsibilities of the PIC;  
(9) carriage of passengers;  
(10) aircraft documentation;  
(11) retention of documents;  
(12) flight crew qualification records (licences and ratings);  
(13) revalidation (medical certificates and ratings);  
(14) flight duty period and flight time limitations (flying instructors);  
(15) flight duty period and flight time limitations (students);  
(16) rest periods (flight instructors);  
(17) rest periods (students);  
(18) pilots’ log books;  
(19) flight planning (general);  
(20) safety (general): equipment, radio listening watch, hazards, accidents and incidents 
(including reports), safety pilots etc..  
(b) Technical:  
(1) aircraft descriptive notes;  
(2) aircraft handling (including checklists, limitations, maintenance and technical logs, in 
accordance with relevant requirements, etc.);  
(3) emergency procedures;  
(4) radio and radio navigation aids;  
(5) allowable deficiencies (based on the master minimum equipment list (MMEL), if 
available).  
(c) Route:   
(1) performance (legislation, take -off, route, landing etc.);  
(2) flight planning (fuel, oil, minimum safe altitude, navigation equipment etc.);  
(3) loading (load sheets, mass, balance and limitations);  
(4) weather minima (flying instructors);  
(5) weather minima (students – at various stages of training);  
(6) training routes or areas.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1801 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1802  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
(d) Personnel training  
(1) appointments of persons responsible for standards/competence of flight personnel;  
(2) initial training;  
(3) refresher training;  
(4) standardisation training;  
(5) checks  to verify that training personnel is proficient with regard to all internal ATO 
standards, processes and procedures ;  
(6) upgrading training;  
(7) ATO personnel standards evaluation.


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1802 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1803  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
SECTION  III – ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ATO S PROVIDING SPECIFIC 
TYPES OF TRAINING  
CHAPTER 1 – DISTANCE LEARNING COURSE  
ORA.ATO.300 General  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
The ATO may be approved to conduct modular course programmes using distance learning in the 
following cases:  
(a) modular courses of theoretical knowledge instruction;  
(b) courses of additional theoretical knowledge for a class or type rating; or  
(c) courses of approved pre -entry theoretical knowledge instruction for a first type rating for a 
multi -engined helicopter.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.300 General  
ED Decision 2025/002/R  
DISTANCE LEARNING  
(a) A variety of methods is open to ATOs to present course material. It is, however, necessary for 
ATOs to maintain comprehensive records in order to ensure that students make satisfactory 
academic progress and meet the time constraints laid down in Part -FCL for the completion of 
modular courses.  
(b) The following are given as planning guidelines for ATOs developing the distance learning 
element of modular courses:  
(1) an assumption that a student will study for at least 15 hours per week;  
(2) an indication throughout the course material of what constitutes a week’s study;  
(3) a recommended course structure and order of teaching;  
(4) one progress test for each subject for every 15 hours of study, which should be submitted 
to the ATO for assessment. Additional self -assessed progress tests should be completed 
at intervals of five to 10 study hours;  
(5) appropriate contact times throughout the course when a student can have access to an 
instructor by telephone, fax, email or the Internet;  
(6) measurement criteria to determine whether a student has satisfactorily completed the 
appropriate elements of the course to a standard that, in the judgement of the HT, or 
CTKI , will enable them to be entered for the Part -FCL theoretical examinations with a 
good prospect of success;  
(7) if the ATO provides the distance learning by help of IT solutions, for example the Internet, 
instructors should monitor students’ progress by appropriate means.  
(c)  Where an assessment (e.g. planning, written, scenario or practical exercise, or other 
assessment) is conducted outside the classroom via distance learning, the ATO should have a 
procedure or process in place to establish that the student themselves ha ve completed the 


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1803 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1804  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
assessment and that the assessment method(s) for that particular exercise has (have) been 
effective.  
ORA.ATO.305 Classroom instruction  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) An element of classroom instruction shall be included in all subjects of modular distance 
learning courses.  
(b) The amount of time spent in actual classroom instruction shall not be less than 10 % of the total 
duration of the course.  
(c) To this effect, classroom accommodation shall be available either at the principal place of 
business of the ATO or within a suitable facility elsewhere.  
AMC1  ORA.ATO.305(b)  Classroom instruction  
ED Decision 2017/022 /R 
Classroom instruction delivered by an instructor to a student may include videoconferencing 
appropriate to the task if the necessary level of communication is ensured and appropriate equipment 
and tools are available.  
ORA.ATO.310 Instructors  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
All instructors  shall be fully familiar with the requirements of the distance learning course programme.  
CHAPTER 2 – ZERO FLIGHT -TIME TRAINING  
ORA.ATO.330 General  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) Approval for zero flight -time training (ZFTT), as specified in Part-FCL, shall only be given to ATOs 
that also have the privileges to conduct commercial air transport operations or ATOs having 
specific arrangements with commercial air transport operators.  
(b) Approval for ZFTT shall only be given if the operator has at least 90 days of operational 
experience on the aeroplane type.  
(c) In the case of ZFTT provided by an ATO having a specific arrangement with an operator, the 90 
days of operational experience requirements will not apply if the type rating instructor (TRI(A)) 
involved in the additional take -offs and landings, as required in Part -ORO, has operational 
experience on the aeroplane type.  
AMC1 ORA.ATO.330 General  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
INITIAL APPROVAL  
For an initial approval to conduct ZFTT, the operator should have held an air operator's certificate for 
commercial air transport for at least 1 year. This period may be reduced where the op erator and the 
ATO have expe rience of type rating training.  


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1804 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART ATO – APPROVED TRAINING 
ORGANISATIONS  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1805  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
ORA.ATO.335 Full flight simulator  
Regulation (EU) No 290/2012  
(a) The FFS approved for ZFTT shall be serviceable according to the management system criteria of 
the ATO.  
(b) The motion and the visual system of the FFS shall be fully serviceable, in accordance with the 
applicable certification specifications for FSTD as mentioned in ORA.FSTD.205 . 
CHAPTER 3 – MULTI-CREW PILOT LICENCE (MPL)  COURSES  
ORA.ATO.350 General  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
The privileges to conduct MPL integrated training courses and MPL instructor courses shall only be 
given to the ATO if it also has the privilege  to conduct commercial air transport operations or a specific 
arrangement with a commercial air transport operator.  
CHAPTER 4 – FLIGHT TEST TRAINING  
ORA.ATO.355 Flight test training organisations  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The ATO that has been approved to provide flight test training for the issue of a category 1 or 2 
flight test rating in accordance with Part -FCL may have its privileges extended to providing 
training for other categories of flight tests and other categori es of flight test personnel, provided 
that:  
(1) the relevant requirements of Part -21 are met; and  
(2) a specific arrangement exists between the ATO and the Part -21 organisation that 
employs, or intends to employ, such personnel.  
(b) The training records shall include the written reports by the student, as required by the training 
programme, including, where applicable, data processing and analysis of recorded parameters 
relevant to the type of flight test.


===== PRINTED_PAGE_1805 =====
 Easy Access Rules for Aircrew 
(Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011)  ANNEX VII (Part -ORA)  
SUBPART FSTD – REQUIREMENTS FOR 
ORGANISATIONS OPERATING FLIGHT 
SIMULATION TRAINING DEVICES (FSTDs) 
AND THE QUALIFICATION OF FSTDs  
 
Powered by EASA eRules  Page 1806  of 1870 | Nov 2025  
 
SUBPART  FSTD  – REQUIREMENTS  FOR  ORGANISATIONS  
OPERATING  FLIGHT  SIMULATION  TRAINING  DEVICES  (FSTD S) 
AND  THE  QUALIFICATION  OF FSTD S 
SECTION  I – REQUIREMENTS FOR ORGANISATIONS OPERATING FSTD S 
ORA.FSTD.100 General  
Regulation (EU) No 1178/2011  
(a) The applicant for an FSTD qualification certificate shall demonstrate to the competent authority 
that it has established a management system in accordance with ORA.GEN Section II. This 
demonstration shall ensure that the applicant has, directly or through  contract, the capability 
to maintain the performance, functions and other characteristics specified for the FSTD’s 
qualification level and to control the installation of the FSTD.  
(b) If the applicant is the holder of a qualification certificate issued in accordance with this Part, the 
FSTD specifications shall be detailed:  
(1) in the terms of the ATO certificate; or  
(2) in the case of an AOC holder, in the training manual.  
AMC1 ORA.FSTD.100 General  
ED Decision 2012/007/R  
COMPLIANCE MONITORING PROGRAMME – ORGANISATIONs OPERATING FSTDs  
(a) Introduction.  
(1) The purpose of this AMC is to provide additional and specific information to an 
organisation operating FSTDs on how to establish a compliance monitoring programme 
(CMP) that enables compliance with the applicable requirements.  
(b) Compliance monitoring programme  
(1) Typical subject areas for inspections are the following:  
(i) actual FSTD operation;  
(ii) maintenance;  
(iii) technical standards  
(iv) FSTD safety features.  
(c) Audit scope  
(1) Organisations operating FSTDs are required to monitor compliance with the procedures 
they have designed to ensure specified performance and functions. In doing so they 
should as a minimum, and where appropriate, monitor the following:  
(i) organisation;  
(ii) plans and objectives;  