ORGANIZATION MANAGEMENT MANUAL (OMM) – REVISION 4.0

PART 3 – SAFETY MANAGEMENT MANUAL

0. OUTLINE

	0.	GENERAL
 0.1 Index of Abbreviations
 0.2 Definitions and Terms
	1.	SCOPE OF THE SAFETY MANAGEMENT MANUAL
	2.	SAFETY POLICY AND OBJECTIVES
 2.1 Objectives
 2.2 EuroPilot Center Safety Policy
	3.	SAFETY ACCOUNTABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES
 3.1 Safety accountability of the Accountable Manager
 3.2 Safety responsibility of Key Safety Personnel
  3.2.1 Organogram
 3.3 Safety Manager
  3.3.1 Requirements
  3.3.2 Duties and Responsibilities
 3.2.3 Safety Manager Training (Initial & Recurrent)
 3.4 Safety Review Board (SRB)
  3.4.1 SRB Meeting Process
   3.4.1.1 Phase 1 – Scheduling
   3.4.1.2 Phase 2 – Recording Minutes
   3.4.1.3 Phase 3 – Action Planning
   3.4.1.4 Phase 4 – Closing
 3.5 Safety Action Group (SAG)
  3.5.1 SAG Meeting Process
   3.5.1.1 Phase 1 – Scheduling
   3.5.1.2 Phase 2 – Recording Minutes
   3.5.1.3 Phase 3 – Action Planning
   3.5.1.4 Phase 4 – Closing
 3.6 Personnel and students
	4.	DOCUMENTATION CONTROL PROCEDURE
 4.1 Control of Specifications / Prescriptive Documents
 4.2 Control of Records
	5.	SAFETY RISK MANAGEMENT
 5.1 Safety Risk Assessment
  5.1.1 Scope
  5.1.2 Influencing Elements
  5.1.3 ALARP Concept
 5.2 Risk Assessment Process Steps
  5.2.1 Preparation
  5.2.2 Hazard Identification
   5.2.2.1 Hazard Classification
   5.2.2.2 Hazard Identification Sources
   5.2.2.3 Hazard Consequences
   5.2.2.4 Hazard Identification Process
   5.2.2.5 Hazards, Risks and Controls
   5.2.2.6 Hazard Recording
   5.2.2.7 Undesirable Events
  5.2.3 Risk Assessment, Description and Evaluation
   5.2.3.1 Likelihood
   5.2.3.2 Severity
   5.2.3.3 Risk Evaluation
  5.2.4 Risk Control
   5.2.4.1 Identification of Risk Mitigation Measures
   5.2.4.2 Risk Mitigation Priorities
   5.2.4.3 Risk Control Types
   5.2.4.4 Risk Control Effect Assessment
   5.2.4.5 Cost Benefit Analysis			
  5.2.5 Conclusion and Documentation
   5.2.5.1 Scope
   5.2.5.2 Database of Hazards, Risk Assessment and Risk Control	
 5.3 Changes invalidating risk assessment
 5.4 Implementation of risk mitigation
 5.5 Monitoring, Review and Improvement
 5.6 Occurrence Reporting and Internal Safety Investigations
  5.6.1 Mandatory Occurrence Reporting
  5.6.2 Voluntary Occurrence Reporting
  5.6.3 Exchange of Information
  5.6.4 Occurrence Reporting Scheme
  5.6.5 E-Occurrence Report (E-OR)
 5.7 Safety Performance Monitoring and Measurement
  5.7.1 Stepwise Approach
  5.7.2 Fixing Safety Performance Objectives
  5.7.3 Process
 5.8 Emergency Response Planning
  5.8.1 General
  5.8.2 Aim
  5.8.3 Events
  5.8.4 Organization
  5.8.5 Emergency Call
  5.8.6 Emergency Numbers
  5.8.7 Crisis Management Center
   5.8.7.1 Personnel in charge
   5.8.7.2 Modes of Activating the Crisis Management Team
   5.8.7.3 Activation Levels   5.8.7.4 Activation
   5.8.7.5 Crisis Log	
  5.8.8 Internal & External Communication
   5.8.8.1 External Communication
   5.8.8.2 Internal Communication	
  5.8.9 Roles of the Crisis Management Team
   5.8.9.1 The Accountable Manager
   5.8.9.2 The Head of Training   
   5.8.9.3 The Safety Manager
 5.9 Management of Change
   5.9.1 Phase 1 – Receiving the Change Request
   5.9.2 Phase 2 – Analyzing Changes
   5.9.3 Phase 3 – Drafting MoC & Action Planning
   5.9.4 Phase 4 – Obtaining BCAA Approval
   5.9.5 Phase 5 – Closing	
 5.10 Continuous Improvement
   5.10.1 Improvement of Safety Performance	
	6.	SAFETY PROMOTION
	7.	CONTRACTED ACTIVITIES
	8.	TRAINING AND COMMUNICATION ON SAFETY
 8.1 Training
 8.2 Communication
 8.3 Safety Committee Airport Meetings
   8.3.1 Phase 1 – Preparing for the Safety Committee Airport Meeting
   8.3.2 Phase 2 – Attending the Meeting and Meeting Minutes
   8.3.3 Phase 3 – Action Planning



0. GENERAL

0.1 Index of Abbreviations

ALARP – As Low as Reasonably Practicable
AM – Accountable Manager
AMC – Acceptable Means of Compliance
ASR – Air Safety Report
ATO – Approved Training Organization
AU – Audit
CMM – Compliance Monitoring Manager
EASA – European Aviation Safety Agency
EGAST – European General Aviation Safety Team
EHEST – European Helicopter Safety Team
ERP – Emergency Response Planning or Plan
ESSI – European Strategic Safety Initiative
FDM – Flight Data Monitoring
GM – Guidance Material
ICAO – International Civil Aviation Organization
IHST – International Helicopter Safety Team
MOC – Management of Change
OMM – Organization Management Manual
SAG – Safety Action Group
SM – Safety Manager
SM ICG – Safety Management International Cooperation Group
SMM – Safety Management Manual
SMS – Safety Management System
SOP – Standard Operating Procedure
SPI – Safety Performance Indicator
SPO / SPT – Safety Performance Objective / Target
SRB – Safety Review Board
SRM – Safety Risk Management
SURV – Survey



0.2 Definitions and Terms

Accident Precursor
Event(s) which, without appropriate mitigation, can result in Undesirable Events, incidents and accidents.

Audit
A systematic, independent and documented process for obtaining evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which requirements are complied with.

Hazard
A condition, object, activity or event with the potential of causing injuries to personnel, damage to equipment or structures, loss of material, or reduction of the ability to perform a prescribed function.

Inspection
An independent documented conformity evaluation by observation and judgement accompanied as appropriate by measurement, testing or gauging, in order to verify compliance with applicable requirements (including procedures, work instruction standards, etc.).

Likelihood
Used as a synonym of probability. It is a measure of how likely something is to happen.

Management of Change
A documented process to identify external and internal changes that may have an adverse (or positive) effect on safety.

Mitigation Barrier
Risk control mitigating the outcome (severity) of an incident or an accident.

Prevention Barrier
Risk control aimed at preventing Undesirable Events and Undesirable Operational States.

Recovery Barrier
Risk control aimed at preventing escalation into an accident.

Risk
The combination of occurrence likelihood and severity.

Risk Tolerability Matrix
A matrix combining risk likelihood and risk severity.

Safety
The state in which risks associated with aviation activities are reduced and controlled to an acceptable level.

Safety Assurance
The process encompassing safety performance monitoring, management of change and continuous improvement.



1. SCOPE OF THE SAFETY MANAGEMENT MANUAL

The Safety Management Manual (SMM) is a reference document describing how safety is managed within EuroPilot Center ATO.

The SMM is the key instrument for communicating EuroPilot Center’s safety approach to all its personnel and students.

The SMM documents all aspects of safety management, including:

• scope of the SMS;
• safety policy and objectives;
• safety accountability of the Accountable Manager;
• safety responsibilities of key safety personnel;
• documentation control procedures;
• hazard identification and risk management schemes;
• safety action planning;
• safety performance monitoring;
• incident investigation and reporting;
• emergency response planning;
• management of change;
• safety promotion.

The SMM is part of the EuroPilot Center Organization Management Manual (OMM).



2. SAFETY POLICY AND OBJECTIVES

By means of the Safety Policy, EuroPilot Center states its intention to maintain and, where practicable, improve safety levels in all its activities and to minimise the risk of an aircraft accident as far as is reasonably practicable.



2.1 Objectives

The Safety Policy:

• is endorsed by the Accountable Manager;
• reflects organizational commitments regarding safety and its proactive management;
• is communicated throughout EuroPilot Center;
• includes safety reporting principles.

It includes a commitment:

• to improve towards the highest safety standards;
• to comply with applicable legislation and standards;
• to provide appropriate resources;
• to enforce safety as a primary responsibility of all managers;
• not to blame individuals for reporting safety concerns.

EuroPilot Center will:

• continuously promote the safety policy;
• provide necessary human and financial resources;
• establish safety objectives and performance standards.



2.2 EuroPilot Center Safety Policy
EuroPilot Center
Safety Policy

Safety is one of EuroPilot Center’s core values. We are committed to developing, implementing, maintaining and constantly improving strategies and processes to ensure that all our aviation training activities take place under an appropriate allocation of organizational resources, aimed at achieving the highest level of safety performance and meeting regulatory requirements, while delivering our services.

All levels of management and personnel are accountable for the delivery of this highest level of safety performance, starting with the Accountable Manager.

We are committed to:

• Support the management of safety through the provision of all appropriate resources, that will result in an organizational culture that fosters safe practices, encourages effective safety reporting and communication, and actively manages safety with the same attention to results as the attention to the results of the other management systems within the organization;
• Ensure the management of safety is a primary responsibility of all managers and employees;
• Clearly define for all staff, managers and employees alike, their accountabilities and responsibilities for the delivery of the organization‘s safety performance and the performance of our safety management system;
• Establish and operate hazard identification and risk management processes, including a hazard reporting system, in order to eliminate or mitigate the safety risks of the consequences of hazards resulting from our operations or activities to achieve continuous improvement in our safety performance;
• Ensure that no action will be taken against any employee/student who discloses a safety concern through the hazard reporting system, unless such disclosure indicates, beyond any reasonable doubt, gross negligence or a deliberate or willful disregard of regulations or procedures;
• Comply with and, wherever possible, exceed, legislative and regulatory requirements and standards;
• Ensure that sufficient skilled and trained human resources are available to implement safety strategies and processes;
• Ensure that all staff members are provided with adequate and appropriate aviation safety information and training, are competent in safety matters, and are allocated only tasks commensurating with their skills;
• Establish and measure our safety performance against realistic safety performance indicators and safety performance targets;
• Continually improve our safety performance through continuous monitoring and measurement, and regular review and adjustment of safety objectives and targets, and diligent achievement of these; and
• Ensure externally supplied systems and services to support our operations are delivered meeting our safety performance standards.

Maria A. Paz
Accountable Manager
EuroPilot Center ATO


3. SAFETY ACCOUNTABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES



3.1 Safety accountability of the Accountable Manager

The Accountable Manager bears the safety accountability which means that he is ultimately accountable for safety within EuroPilot Center.

• He/she endorses the Safety Policy (including the EuroPilot Center statement on the protection of the reporters, OMM Annex 7 - Protection of Reporters).
• Provides the human and material resources necessary for operating the SMS and achieving the safety objectives.
• Nominates the Safety Manager, the Compliance Monitoring Manager and the Safety Review Board.

The Accountable Manager chairs the Safety Review Board and endorses the safety objectives.



3.2 Safety responsibility of Key Safety Personnel

The safety management organization includes:

• The Accountable Manager (AM)
• The Safety Manager (SM)
• The Compliance Monitoring Manager (CMM)
• A Safety Review Board (SRB)



3.2.1 Organogram
We refer to OM Annex 35 – Organogram.



3.3 Safety Manager



3.3.1 Requirements
The following experience/qualifications are required for a Safety Manager within EuroPilot Center:

• Has extensive knowledge of Aviation Rules and Regulations (including FSTD’s).
• Preferably hold or have held a Commercial (or Airline Pilot License).
• Has been a Safety Manager for an Aviation Organization for at least 1 year; or
• Has extensive experience in Safety Management Systems; or
• Has attended the Safety Management Course (e.g. internal course or through an entity such as JAATO).
• Possesses sound managerial skills.
• Speaks, writes and understands the English language.



3.3.2 Duties and Responsibilities
The Safety Manager acts as the focal point and is responsible for the development, administration and maintenance of the SMS.

The duties of the Safety Manager are to:

• facilitate hazard identification, risk analysis and management;
• monitor the implementation of actions taken to mitigate risks as listed in the safety action plan;
• provide periodic reports on safety performance;
• ensure maintenance of safety management documentation;
• ensure that there is safety management training available and that it meets acceptable standards;
• provide advice on safety matters;
• ensure initiation and follow-up of internal occurrence/accident investigations.

The Safety Manager is the focal point for:

• collecting and analyzing hazards and maintaining a register of hazards, risks and risk controls (mitigations);
• development, administration and maintenance of the SMS.



3.3.3 Safety Manager Training (Initial & Recurrent)
Has received a course from an experienced Safety Manager in the following topics:
Basic Safety Management Systems (Min. 2h00).
Evaluation and Reporting (Min. 2h00).

Or has attended the same course through another entity (e.g. JAATO) and has provided EuroPilot Center with an appropriate Certificate of Training.

In addition, the applicant shall be trained on:

• Safety Management system procedures within EuroPilot Center (Min. 1h00).
• EuroPilot Center manuals and document control procedures (Min. 1h00).
• EuroPilot Center ATO OMM and OM procedures (Min. 1h00).
• EuroPilot Center Safety Reporting System (Min. 1h00).
• EuroPilot Center Safety Management Online System (Min. 2h00).

Practical Training shall consist of conducting at least 2 months of Safety Management Training under supervision with an experienced Safety Manager.

All training should be logged in the E-gle System by the Safety Manager.

Recurrent Training does not apply to Safety Managers.



3.4 Safety Review Board (SRB)

The Safety Review Board is a high level committee that considers matters of strategic safety in support of the Accountable Manager.

The Safety Review Board is chaired by the Accountable Manager and is composed of:

• The Compliance Monitoring Manager
• The Head of Training
• The Chief Flight Instructor
• The Chief Theoretical Knowledge Instructor

The Safety Review Board monitors the safety performance against the safety policy and safety objectives, monitors that any safety action is taken in a timely manner and that the SMS is effective.

The Accountable Manager ensures that appropriate resources are allocated to achieve the established safety performance and informs the Safety Review Board accordingly.

The Safety Manager may attend, as appropriate, Safety Review Board meetings. The Safety Manager may communicate to the Accountable Manager all information, as necessary, to allow decision making based on safety data.

3.4.1 Process of the Safety Review Board Meeting

The yearly safety Review Board meeting will be scheduled, held, recorded and follow-up actions shall be taken, according to the process below, consisting of 4 phases:

PHASE 1 – Scheduling the Safety Review Board (SRB) Meeting
PHASE 2 – Recording the Meeting Minutes
PHASE 3 – Action Planning
PHASE 4 – Closing



3.4.1.1 Phase 1 – Scheduling the Safety Review Board (SRB) Meeting

• Login to PipeDrive and Click on “Projects”.
• From the Dropdown list on the right, select the “AM - Safety Review Board Meeting” -Project.
• Click on “plus symbol” located inside the first Phase of the Project (or the Green “+ Project” button on the left).
• Select the “Safety Review Board” Template.
• Name the Project as per following convention: “SRB Meeting: MM/YYYY” (e.g. SRB Meeting: 02/2023”).
• Enter “Start Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the SRB Meeting).
• Enter “End Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the SRB Meeting + 90 days).
• Select Label” In Progress”.
• Perform the checklist items under the “PLAN” section of the Project.
• If relevant for the SRB Meeting, the AM can upload documents via the “FILES” section of the Project.
• The AM should draft the “Agenda” of the SRB Meeting and use the “NOTES” Section of the Project (this can be performed in close cooperation with the SM).
• When receiving relevant e-mails from official sources, they should be linked to the Project by opening the e-mail in PipeDrive, on the right, enter the Project Name in the textfield underneath the “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.
• The AM sends the invite for the Meeting to the HT, SM, CFI and CTKI including the SRB Meeting “Agenda”.



3.4.1.2 PHASE 2 – Recording the Meeting Minutes

• The Safety Manager will be in charge.
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive to obtain all the data collected during Phase 1.
• Move the Project to Phase 2.
• During the SRB Meeting, the minutes will be recorded by the SM by updating the “NOTES” section of the Project.

Note: If the SM is unable to record the SRB Minutes, the CMM will be next, followed by the HT, CFI, CTKI and AM.



3.4.1.3 PHASE 3 – Action Planning

• The SM will be in charge.
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive.
• Move the Project to Phase 3.
• Execute the PLAN Checklist for this Phase.
• Start drafting the “SRB Meeting Minutes” via de “EMAILS” section of the Project by creating a new e-mail via the Template Menu. Select the “SRB Meeting Minutes” template.
• Create an Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section.
• Select a “TASK” for each Action Item requiring a Task to be fulfilled, add sub-tasks if required.
• Allocate the “TASK” to the responsible person within the organization and add a due-date (proposal).
• Only select “ACTIVITY” when a certain Action requires a Calendar event such as a Meeting etc.
• Once the SRB Meeting Minutes e-mail has been drafted and the Action Plan is prepared under the PLAN section, the SM sends the e-mail to the AM, CMM, HT, CFI and CTKI.

IMPORTANT! An SRB Meeting may trigger a “Change Request” which shall be sent to the Safety Manager, hence may initiate a Management of Change Procedure.



3.4.1.4 PHASE 4 – Closing

• The SM will be in charge.
• After either the “SRB Meeting Minutes” have been reviewed by the AM, CMM, HT, CFI and CTKI, feedback obtained shall be used to update the Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section by the SM.
• Based on the deadlines for each Action item, the SM shall follow-up with the person to whom the Task was allocated. Pipedrive will generate automatic triggers if required.
• The SM ensures all Task Items are closed and “archives” the Project.



3.5 Safety Action Group (SAG)

The Safety Action Group reports to and takes strategic direction from the Safety Review Board.

It comprises managers, supervisors and staff from operational areas.

The Safety Manager may also be included in the Safety Action Group.

The Safety Action Group:

• oversees operational safety;
• resolves identified risks;
• assesses the impact on safety of operational changes;
• implements corrective action plans;
• ensures that corrective action is achieved within agreed timescales.

3.5.1 Process of the Safety Action Group Meeting

A Safety Action Group Meeting will be assembled by the SRB on an ad-hoc basis as deemed required by the Safety Review Board, according to the process below, consisting of 4 phases:

PHASE 1 – Scheduling the Safety Action Group (SAG) Meeting
PHASE 2 – Recording the Meeting Minutes
PHASE 3 – Action Planning
PHASE 4 – Closing



3.5.1.1 Phase 1 – Scheduling the Safety Action Group (SAG) Meeting

• The Safety Manager will be in charge.
• Login to PipeDrive and Click on “Projects”.
• From the Dropdown list on the right, select the “SM - Safety Action Group Meeting” -Project.
• Click on “plus symbol” located inside the first Phase of the Project (or the Green “+ Project” button on the left).
• Select the “Safety Action Group” Template.
• Name the Project as per following convention: “SAG Meeting: MM/YYYY” (e.g. SAG Meeting: 02/2023”).
• Enter “Start Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the SAG Meeting).
• Enter “End Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the SAG Meeting + 90 days).
• Select Label” In Progress”.
• Perform the checklist items under the “PLAN” section of the Project.
• If relevant for the SAG Meeting, the AM can upload documents via the “FILES” section of the Project.
• The SM should draft the “Agenda” of the SAG Meeting and use the “NOTES” Section of the Project.
• When receiving relevant e-mails from official sources, they should be linked to the Project by opening the e-mail in PipeDrive, on the right, enter the Project Name in the textfield underneath the “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.
• The SM sends the invite for the Meeting to the AM, HT, CFI and CTKI including the SAG Meeting “Agenda”.



3.5.1.2 PHASE 2 – Recording the Meeting Minutes

• The Safety Manager will be in charge.
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive to obtain all the data collected during Phase 1.
• Move the Project to Phase 2.
• During the SAG Meeting, the minutes will be recorded by the SM by updating the “NOTES” section of the Project.

Note: If the SM is unable to record the SAG Minutes, the CMM will be next, followed by the HT, CFI, CTKI and AM.



3.5.1.3 PHASE 3 – Action Planning

• The SM will be in charge.
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive.
• Move the Project to Phase 3.
• Execute the PLAN Checklist for this Phase.
• Start drafting the “SAG Meeting Minutes” via de “EMAILS” section of the Project by creating a new e-mail via the Template Menu. Select the “SAG Meeting Minutes” template.
• Create an Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section.
• Select a “TASK” for each Action Item requiring a Task to be fulfilled, add sub-tasks if required.
• Allocate the “TASK” to the responsible person within the organization and add a due-date (proposal).
• Only select “ACTIVITY” when a certain Action requires a Calendar event such as a Meeting etc.
• Once the SAG Meeting Minutes e-mail has been drafted and the Action Plan is prepared under the PLAN section, the SM sends the e-mail to the AM, CMM, HT, CFI and CTKI.

IMPORTANT! An SAG Meeting may trigger a “Change Request” which shall be sent to the Safety Manager, hence may initiate a Management of Change Procedure.



3.5.1.4 PHASE 4 – Closing

• The SM will be in charge.
• After either the “SAG Meeting Minutes” have been reviewed by the AM, CMM, HT, CFI and CTKI, feedback obtained shall be used to update the Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section by the SM.
• Based on the deadlines for each Action item, the SM shall follow-up with the person to whom the Task was allocated. Pipedrive will generate automatic triggers if required.
• The SM ensures all Task Items are closed and “archives” the Project.



3.6 Personnel and students

All EuroPilot Center personnel in charge of operational tasks and all EuroPilot Center students have the following responsibilities:

• ensure both their own and the safety of other personnel and/or students;
• interrupt or discontinue their tasks if their safety or that of others is at risk;
• perform their tasks in compliance with regulations and EuroPilot Center procedures;
• practice and promote the EuroPilot Center safety policy;
• notify hazards and safety-related events and report any relevant information to the Safety Manager;
• take note of the lessons learnt from incidents and accidents and take appropriate measures to protect themselves and others;
• participate in safety briefings, meetings and events;
• participate, if applicable, in safety analyses;
• know their role in the Emergency Response Plan.

All personnel and students have a part in implementing the SMS successfully. It’s the responsibility of everyone within EuroPilot Center to identify and report hazards.

All personnel and students are to inform the Safety Manager of any situation deemed to be hazardous to flight safety and to their own safety or the safety of others both within or out of EuroPilot Center ATO.

All personnel and students have to be trained in the SMS and have knowledge of their roles and responsibilities.

• For personnel, this takes place during the initial Standardization course.
• For students, this takes place immediately after their course enrollment.

Self-study of the Safety Manual or a Briefing will be foreseen followed by a short multiple choice questionnaire.


4. DOCUMENTATION CONTROL PROCEDURE



4.1 Control of Specifications / Prescriptive Documents

For all internal Standards and Procedures, EuroPilot Center ensures that the current versions are available in the EuroPilot Center Planning and Operations room. The amendment procedure of the OMM, OM, TM and QTG is specified in the introduction part of the respective manual.



4.2 Control of Records

Records are documents or data stating results achieved, or providing evidence of activities performed. To ensure an authorized and quick access to records, they have to be:

• Properly identified
• Systematically stored for the period required
• Destroyed after storage period in a controlled manner

Note: Storage can be in an electronic format (cloud-based).

Document | Responsibility | Place of Storage | Storage

Safety Objectives and Indicators
• Safety Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• 5 Years

Safety Review Board Reports
• Accountable Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• 5 Years

Event Reports
• Safety Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• Permanent

Audit Reports including the follow-up of corrective actions
• Safety Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• 5 Years

Hazard and Risk Registers
• Safety Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• Permanent

Risk Mitigations
• Safety Manager
• EPC Administration Archives
• Permanent

Safety Training Reports
• Head of Training
• EPC Administration Archives
• Permanent



5. SAFETY RISK MANAGEMENT

Safety Risk Management combines the following processes and components:

• Hazard identification, risk assessment and mitigation processes
• Internal safety investigation
• Safety performance monitoring and measurement
• Management of change
• Communication (Safety Notes and yearly Safety Bulletin).
• Continuous improvement
• The Emergency Response Plan (ERP)

A formal risk management process has been developed and is maintained to ensure that:

• analysis, in terms of likelihood and severity of occurrence;
• assessment, in terms of tolerability; and
• control, in terms of mitigation of risks to an acceptable level.

Additionally, the levels of management that have the authority to make decisions regarding the tolerability of safety risks are specified in the following paragraphs.



5.1 Safety Risk Assessment

5.1.1 Scope of Safety Risk Assessment
The SMS only addresses the assessment of aviation safety risks. This does not mean that financial,legal, or economic aspects do not need to be considered in the risk assessment process. EuroPilotCenter identifies all significant influences that may impact aviation safety, in particular whendetermining contributing factors for the analysis of consequences of a hazard, and deciding on riskmitigation measures.
5.1.2 Elements that influence the Safety Risk Assessment
5.1.2.1 Communication and ConsultationGood communication within EuroPilot Center and, where relevant, with external parties, students,partners, or contractors, should help ensure access to all relevant information, and assist in ensuringbuy-in from all those that may be affected by the risk assessment conclusions andrecommendations.
5.1.2.2 Regulatory Requirements - Risk addressed by RegulationsRegulations are generally developed to control common safety risks that stem from specific orgeneral hazards through prescriptive, technical standards in the areas of technology, training, or task performance.Such hazards controlled by regulations do not need to be further addressed in the Organization’srisk assessment unless evidence exists that the regulatory provision is not sufficient.If the regulation is not specific, has several options, or directly calls for a risk assessment, the hazard obviously should be assessed, and the appropriate provision implemented.

5.1.2.3 Regulatory Requirements - Organization’s ResourcesAvailable resources are relevant with respect to both capacity and competence:• for the risk assessment process itself; and• for the activity being assessed (aircraft, equipment, personnel, finances, etc.).EuroPilot Center’s current resources in terms of equipment and personnel are normally consideredin the risk assessment.

5.1.3 The ALARP Concept
Risk Acceptance Criteria are established on the basis of a Safety Policy and Safety PerformanceObjectives. Furthermore, management responsibility for the acceptability of safety risks is defined as part of the SMS.
Safety risk acceptance criteria address the following:• Flight Instructors;• Theoretical Knowledge Instructors;• Students;• The natural environment; and• The corporate well-being.
EuroPilot Center employs the ‘As Low As Reasonably Practicable’ (ALARP) risk acceptancecriterion.
This ALARP criterion is not exclusively based on fixed risk level targets but is a systematic and documented process to reduce safety risks below the maximum allowed by regulations orstandards or when the risk is otherwise considered unacceptable.ALARP means that the safety risk is being managed to as low a level as reasonably practicablewhilst at all times staying below the maximum allowed risk.

5.2 Risk Assessment Process Steps

5.2.1 Preparation

The Safety Risk Assessment should be initiated in time for the results to be available before any decisions regarding the activity concerned have to be made.

The Safety Manager:

• shall determine the need for a dedicated working group comprised of suitable subject matter experts and personnel involved in EuroPilot Center’s activities;
• shall also decide whether, and what other methods and sources are used to determine hazard causes, likelihood and consequences;
• progressively extend and personalize the data base;
• shall decide whether to use additional data sources.

The EuroPilot Center database shall contain:

• information resulting from the investigation of internal occurrences and accidents;
• reported deviations and proposals for improvement;
• experience collected from the monitoring of normal operations.

The EuroPilot Center database may be augmented with similar data exchanged with other operators. Whenever possible, the process of risk assessment should further build upon experience derived from risk assessments carried out previously.



5.2.2 Hazard Identification



5.2.2.1 Hazard Classification
Hazards can come from different sources, including but not limited to:

• Natural and environmental: weather, earthquake, wind and sand, sea water, rocks, cliffs, ice structures, rough waters, volcano lava and dusts, etc.;
• Economic: competition, production pressure, cost pressure, etc.;
• Unsafe conditions: use of unofficial documentation or documents not up to date, poor resources;
• Psychological: mood, external pressure, personality issues, etc.;
• Physiological: diseases, hypoxia, perceptual illusions, fatigue, sleep deprivation, jet lag, medication, alcohol, intoxication, digestion troubles, etc.;
• Technological: design or maintenance related, hazardous material, pollution, explosions, etc.;
• Operational or mission specific: obstacles, cables, demanding landing sites (moving platforms/off airfield sites), degraded visual cuing (brown-out and white-out), demanding/overbearing customers (VIPs), etc.;
• Unsafe acts: errors, violations, negligence, sabotage, excessive/uncontrolled performance variations.



5.2.2.2 Hazard Identification Sources
Hazards can be identified from different internal and external sources and are elements, in isolation or in combination, which may have contributed or could contribute to an incident or accident.

Internal sources

• Safety assessment of systems and operations;
• Voluntary reports, spontaneous identification;
• Safety indicator tendencies;
• Inspections and audits.

External sources

• Accident and incident reports;
• Technical publications from manufacturers (for instance Safety Information Bulletins);
• Safety Information Bulletins, safety alerts and other safety publications from EASA, the European Commission, the National Aviation Authorities, ICAO, Eurocontrol, the FAA and other authorities worldwide;
• Websites such as SKYbrary and Wikipedia;
• Safety publications by national or international associations and safety initiatives such as AGAST, EHEST and IHST, the Helicopter Association International (HAI), the Royal Aeronautical Society (RAeS), the Flight Safety Foundation (FSF), Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA), etc.;
• Safety publications by industry, research Organizations and academia;
• Professional journals, conference proceedings, safety campaigns, helicopter safety days;
• Benchmarks between operators, data aggregated at sector level or by the manufacturers, etc.



5.2.2.3 Hazard Consequences Identification Sources

Hazards are distinguished from hazard consequences.

Consequences can be described based on the hazard information specifying the place, time, extent, nature, etc. of the event as required.

Hazard identification also provides a systematic overview of all possible consequences.

For each hazard, the following question should be asked:
What were or could have been the possible hazard consequences?

Where information on the consequence of a hazard has been identified for a specific type of activity it should be available directly from data sources.

It is also worth noting that the absence of past incidents/accidents does not mean absence of risk.

Aids to the identification of possible consequences include:

• Other risk assessments;
• Occurrence and accident reports;
• Audits/non-compliance reports;
• Internal reviews;
• Instructor Meetings;
• Threat assessments;
• Standard checklists.



5.2.2.4 Hazard Identification Process

Hazards are identified through the application of a hazard identification process. The hazardidentification process is the formal means of collecting, recording, analyzing, acting on andgenerating feedback about hazards and the associated risks that affect the safety of EuroPilotCenter’s operational activities.
The hazards identification process features several components:
The reactive approach consists of analyzing accidents and incidents that have occurred and trying to understand why. Based on the analysis of reported accidents and incidents, the following questions should be asked:
• What accidents or incidents did happen and why?• For what reasons did these occur? Because of what causal factors?• What barriers or risk controls failed and what barriers worked?The proactive approach consists of analyzing the conduct of operations to identify potentialhazards and assess the associated risks and then to mitigate risks factors before they result in an accident or incident. This approach should trigger the following questions:• What accidents or incidents could happen and why?• For what reasons could these occur?• Do we feel protected enough? Any action we should take now to prevent these fromoccurring?
Hazard identification also features a predictive approach. It consists of conducting a predictive analysis using for instance data extrapolation (estimating for instance the future risk level based on the data collected over the past 3 or 5 years) or statistical modeling (a more complex way).
A predictive approach aims at identifying and mitigating risks before they become evident(addressing today the risks of tomorrow). This approach poses the following question:• What accidents or incidents could happen in the future and why?• Do we feel protected enough? Any action we should take now to avoid such future risks andoccurrences (addressing today the risks of tomorrow)?The predictive and proactive approaches are very effective tools for the management of safety,they should build upon the basis of solid reactive processes.



5.2.2.5 Hazard, Risks and Risk Controls

EuroPilot Center applies the Safety Risk Control Modeling approach.The purpose of this approach is to consider “Undesirable Events” as an intermediate step betweenhazards and risks, and incidents and accidents.Hazards can, in isolation or in combination, lead to Undesirable Events.They trigger a stage in the escalation of an accident scenario, called the Undesirable Operational State, where the scenario has escalated to the point that the accident can only be avoided through successful recovery measure(s) or by chance.• Prevention Barriers are risk controls aimed at preventing Undesirable Events and UndesirableOperational States.• Recovery Barriers are risk controls that prevent these events from resulting in an accident.• Mitigation barriers are risk controls that mitigate the effect of an incident or an accident



5.2.2.6 Hazard Recording

The Safety Manager will maintain a register (or log) of hazards.



5.2.2.7 Identification of Undesirable Events and their Consequences

EuroPilot Center has created a list of Undesirable Events, based on our experience as RF and FTO, as a means to start our SMS. This list will be updated and adapted through the operation of the SMS.


5.2.3 Risk Assessment, Description and Evaluation
Risk combines two dimensions: likelihood of hazard consequences and their severity. Bothdimensions will be assessed.
5.2.3.1 Likelihood
Assessment of likelihood is based on the following two way process:• hazard consequences are analyzed to establish possible causes, contributing factors andexisting barriers.• causes, contributing factors and barriers are then further analyzed to determine likelihood of an occurrence.In the causal analysis of consequence, human and Organizational factors are considered for theirpossible contributing effects. We normally consider direct causes (‘unsafe acts’), workplace factors and Organizational factors (‘error provoking or latent conditions’).The effects of existing likelihood-reducing factors and barriers (See the Section Safety Model) that influence the chain of events are considered and documented, taking into account the following:• certification requirements;• maintenance procedures;• existing normal and abnormal procedures;• technical measures/equipment;• training;• other human and Organizational factors.Causal analysis is performed to the level of detail necessary to establish relevant likelihood values.

Likelihood may be expressed using terminology such as:• very low• low• medium• high• very highLikelihood will be determined by EuroPilot Center as follows:
Likelihood will be determined by EuroPilot Center as follows:

Risk Likelihood
Meaning
Value

FREQUENT
Likely to occur many times. Has already occurred within EuroPilot Center (Freq. > 3 times per year ).
Has occurred frequently in the history of the aviation industry.
5

OCCASIONAL
Likely to occur sometimes. Has already occurred within EuroPilot Center (Freq. < 3 times per year).
Has occurred infrequently in the history of the aviation industry.
4

REMOTE
Unlikely to occur, but possible. Has already occurred within EuroPilot Center at least once or more.
Has seldom occurred in the history of the aviation industry.
3

IMPROBABLE
Very unlikely to occur. Not known to have occurred within EuroPilot Center but has already occurred at least once in the history of the aviation industry.
2

EXTREMELY IMPROBABLE
Almost inconceivable that the event will occur. It has never occurred in the history of the aviation industry.
1

Within EuroPilot Center, a causal and likelihood analysis will be performed by one or a combination of the following methods:

fault tree analysis;
FMECA (Failure Mode, Effects and Critical Analysis);
influence diagrams;
bow-tie diagrams;
brainstorming.

As the risk assessment progresses, an iterative process may help to identify new factors and barriers. These can then be included in the analysis.

5.2.3.2 Severity

The severity of all hazard consequences is analyzed. The analysis considers both short-term and long-term consequences, such as effects on the natural and work environment.
Consequences are grouped such as loss or damage of life/health, environment, material values/assets, functions and reputation.
The determination of severity is normally of a descriptive (qualitative/ordinal terms) nature, except when relevant calculations (quantitative) can or should be applied. A qualitative analysis describes the chains of events that could follow from the hazard and its possible consequences. Quantitative analysis is used to calculate the extent of damage that could be caused.

Severity can be expressed using terminology like:
very small;
small;
medium;
large; and
very large.

Severity will be determined by EuroPilot Center as follows:

Severity
Meaning
Value

Personnel
Environment
Material & Values Assets
Reputation

CATASTROPHIC
Multiple fatalities
Massive effects (pollution, destruction)
Catastrophic financial loss. Damage > 1M EUR
International Impact
E

HAZARDOUS
Fatality
Effects difficult to repair
Severe financial loss with long term effects.
Damage < 1M EUR
National Impact
D

MAJOR
Serious Injuries
Noteworthy local effects
Substantial Financial Loss. Damage < 250K EUR
Considerable Impact
C

MINOR
Light Injuries
Little impact
Financial loss with little impact.
Damage < 50K EUR
Limited Impact
B

NEGLIGIBLE
Superficial or no injuries
Negligable or no effects
Financial loss with negigible impact. Damage < 10K EUR
Light or no Impact
A

In the analysis of severity of each consequence, human and Organizational factors are primarily considered for their possible contributing effects.

The effects of existing recovery controls and barriers that influence the consequence itself or the consequence chain should be considered, as applicable:

certification requirements (e.g. fire protection);
existing abnormal and emergency procedures;
secondary safety measures (e.g. crashworthiness, personal protective equipment);
technical measures/equipment;
training;
human and Organizational factors;
emergency preparedness.

As the risk assessment progresses, it is possible that an iterative process may help to identify new factors and barriers. These are then added to the procedure and included in the analysis.

Risk levels may vary over time depending on the nature of the operation(s) (machines and equipment, procedures and documentation, flight environment, personnel qualification, duration of the tasks, etc.). Comprehensive and up to date data such as risk assessments and risk descriptions help in the task of performing good and effective risk assessments.
Risk must be re-assessed, in particular when a change is introduced.

5.2.3.3 Risk Evaluation

The risk description forms the basis for risk evaluation and mitigation. Based on the results of the likelihood and severity analysis, the risk is described as a combination of the likelihood of occurrence and the associated severity.

Depending on the analysis method and the risk acceptance criteria, the description is either qualitative and/or quantitative. The level of detail depends on the level of detail in the likelihood and severity analysis.
The method used for risk description is a risk matrix combining risk likelihood and risk severity. If a hazard has more than one consequence, the risk may be expressed as a combination of the likelihood and severity for each of the consequences.
Uncertainties in the risk description are to be identified and documented. If the analysis is based on critical assumptions or other conditions that could affect the assessment, these are to be identified and documented (if necessary in the form of a sensitivity analysis).
Hazards can lead to Undesirable Events (UE’s), which can deteriorate into incidents and accidents. Hazards can contribute to several UE’s and are generally related to several Hazards (many-to-many mapping), which all have an associated risk level. The level of risk associated to an UE is, however, not the average of the risk levels associated to the hazards that contribute to the risk.
This is why UE’s are also subject to a separate risk rating. Risk rated UE’s are then used as an input to Safety Cases.

The results of the risk analysis are compared to the criteria for acceptable risk.This comparison is documented using a format that can be used by decision makers.The method used for this is the Risk Tolerability Matrix combining the analysis results and the risk acceptance criteria.

Risk
Risk Severity
Likelihood

NEGLIGIBLE-A
MINOR-B
MAJOR-C
HAZARDOUS-D
CATASTROPHIC-E

FREQUENT-5
5A
5B
5C
5D
5E

OCCASIONAL-4
4A
4B
4C
4D
4E

REMOTE-3
3A
3B
3C
3D
3E

IMPROBABLE-2
2A
2B
2C
2D
2E

EXTREMELY IMPROBABLE-1
1A
1B
1C
1D
1E

The red-colored values indicate unacceptable risk levels, the yellow-coded values are tolerable risk levels and the green-coded values establish acceptable risk levels.
Each risk level calls for a particular action and the levels of management who have the authority to make decisions regarding the tolerability of safety risks need to be specified.

Unacceptable Risk Level - the red zone in the matrix: risk is too high to continue operating.
Action required: Prohibit/suspend the operation. Operation may be resumed only when risk level is returned to tolerable or acceptable.
Management levels who have the authority to make decisions regarding risk tolerability:
For the risk evaluation validation: The assumptions made for the determination of the risk level and its tolerability are to be validated by the Safety Manager.
For the authorization of operations: not applicable: operations cannot be authorized.

Tolerable Risk Level - the yellow zone in the matrix: the risk level can be tolerated for the operation, providing that appropriate mitigation measures are in place.
Action required: Introduce appropriate mitigation measures.
Management levels who have the authority to make decisions regarding risk tolerability:
For the risk evaluation validation: The assumptions made for the determination of the risk level and its tolerability are to be validated by the Safety Manager.
For the authorization of operations: Management who have the authority to authorize operations at this level of risk: the Accountable Manager.

Acceptable Risk Level - the green zone in the matrix: risk is tolerable and can be accepted for the operation.
Action required: Monitor. Risk is considered sufficiently controlled and no additional risk mitigation measures are required. However, in line with the ALARP concept, actions may still be taken to further reduce the risk level if feasible and reasonable. Additionally, any assumptions used to make an assessment must be monitored to ensure they remain valid.
Management levels who have the authority to make decisions regarding risk tolerability:

For the risk evaluation validation: The assumptions made for the determination of the risk level and its tolerability are to be validated by the Safety Manager.

For the authorization of operations: not applicable; no special authorization is required; the authorization of activities featuring ‘acceptable risks’ fall within the regular operational control for operations.

5.2.4 Risk Control

5.2.4.1 Identification of Risk Mitigation Measures

The risk evaluation is the basis for deciding on risk control (mitigating) measures and in assessing the effectiveness of these measures.

Risk control measures identify the consequences associated with both an unacceptable risk and tolerable risk and determine where further risk reduction measures are feasible and reasonable.

Identification of possible mitigation is based on the risk description and evaluation, considering in particular any uncertainties identified and critical assumptions made.

Controls that may eliminate the consequence of a hazard, likelihood-reducing measures and severity-reducing measures are identified. The measures should address the human factors (e.g. training and competence), equipment or Organizational factors (e.g. procedures).

Within EuroPilot Center, all personnel and students contributes to the definition of risk control measures in particular where they concern personal equipment, by their acceptance and use.



5.2.4.2 Risk Mitigation Priorities

Risk control measures are implemented based on the following priorities:

eliminate the consequences of the hazard;
reduce the likelihood of occurrence;
reduce the severity.



5.2.4.3 Risk Control Types

Examples of risk control include:

passive technical controls (e.g. system redundancy, firewall);
active technical controls (e.g. automatic fire extinguishing system).



5.2.4.4 Risk Control Effect Assessment

The risk mitigating effect of the controls is assessed with respect to:

Functionality: does the measure influence the ability to perform the activity?
Robustness: will the measure be effective under varying conditions and over time?
Possible other effects such as introduction of new risks.

When identifying risk control measures, any new risks that may arise from the implementation of such measures (‘substitution risks’) should be identified.

Risk is re-assessed considering the effects of the proposed risk control effects, as illustrated in the table below:

Risk Assessed
Initial Risk Level
Risk Control
Resulting Risk Level

Risk 1

Risk 2

Risk 3

The measures are not necessarily sufficient to bring the risk level back to an acceptable or tolerable level in a first round. If the risk acceptance criteria require further risk reduction, the comparison (iterative process) describes the optimization process. So new risk controls are added, or existing risk controls are modified, until the risk is as low as reasonably practicable (ALARP).

Note that the ALARP concept combines the technical feasibility of further reducing the safety risk and the cost; demonstrating that the safety risk is ALARP means that any further risk reduction is either impracticable or grossly outweighed by the cost.



5.2.4.5 Cost Benefit Analysis

The contemplated mitigation measures should be subjected to a Cost Benefit Analysis, which helps determine the most appropriate measures. The mitigation considered appropriate should achieve the safety benefits desired and should be economically acceptable.

A Cost Benefit Matrix is provided here as an illustration:

Benefits

HIGH  AVERAGE  LOW

COSTS
LOW  1  2  3
AVERAGE  2  3  4
HIGH  3  4  5

Acceptance criteria with regard to the costs of implementing mitigation measures and the expected benefits, are decided by the Accountable Manager.



5.2.5 Conclusion and Documentation

Any risk assessment should be documented and contain unambiguous, precise and robust conclusions to enable decision makers to arrive at appropriate control reduction decisions.

Documentation includes references to other documents (when applicable) and points out any need for further work.



5.2.5.1 Scope
The risk assessment documentation includes or references, as required, descriptions of the following:
• the purpose of the risk assessment;• the activity/issue analyzed;• involvement of personnel and other operators with whom we interact;• context/framework for the activity/issue;• the assessment of who is affected by the activity/issue and how;• data used;• the analysis method;• the hazard(s);• the contributing factors and consequences• uncertainties and assumptions made for the assessment;• the likelihood and severity;• the risk mitigation measures;• the risk evaluation;• the conclusions.



5.2.5.2 Database of Hazards, Risk Assessment and Risk Control

The Safety Manager shall maintain a database of hazards, and of the corresponding risk assessments and mitigations. This risk database records hazards per activity and indicates how these have been addressed in the past and are currently being addressed.

Any future risk assessment may then draw upon the information already available.

The information is both communicated and made available within EuroPilot Center with special attention to the managers in charge, depending on the nature of the risks.

The database of “Hazards” and “Hazards and Undesirable Events” are updated at each step of the risk management processes. These databases also record the results of the processes and serve as a basis for risk monitoring, review and improvement.

We refer to the EuroPilot Center Online Safety Management System for this purpose (http://sms.europilotcenter.be)



5.3 Changes that could Invalidate the Conclusion of a Risk Assessment

Changes that could invalidate the conclusion of a risk assessment could be:

significant changes in the preconditions and context;
new knowledge of risks involved (experience from accidents and occurrences, reporting of safety concerns, research, better risk analysis methods, internal inspections, audits and reviews, hazard reporting);
significant changes in the underlying data used for the assessment;
significant organizational changes that could affect the assessment; and
several smaller changes that together might constitute a significant change.

Depending on the type of activity affected and the nature of the changes, the Safety Manager may decide to reassess the risk.



5.4 Implementation of Risk Mitigation

Implementation of the risk control (mitigation) measures may, depending on the nature of these measures, give rise to an implementation plan identifying who is in charge, the resources needed, the deadline, and the stages of implementation.

The implementation plan is periodically reviewed until completion or revision.



5.5 Monitoring, Review and Improvement

The risk assessment process is monitored for the purpose of:

analyzing and learning from events, changes and trends;
detecting changes in the internal and external context including changes to the risk itself;
ensuring that the risk mitigation measures remain effective; and
identifying emerging risks.

Monitoring and review can be performed through periodic reviews, inspections and audits, risk assessments and the risk management process itself, with the aim to strive for a continuous reduction in the risk level.



5.6 Occurrence Reporting and Internal Safety Investigations

5.6.1 Mandatory Occurrence Reporting

The mandatory reporting of occurrences to the Belgian Civil Aviation Authority applies to natural persons under Article 4 paragraph 6 of the (EU) Regulation No 376/2014.

The Safety Manager is the designated person who is responsible for notifying occurrences to the Belgian Civil Aviation Authority.

The collected information on the occurrences must be reported as soon as possible, and in any case within a period not exceeding 72 hours after becoming aware of the occurrence.

The preliminary results and any action taken, based on the analysis performed by the Safety Manager, on occurrences collected to identify the safety hazards associated with identified occurrences or groups of occurrences, shall be reported within 30 days from the date of notification of the occurrence.

The final results of the analysis, where required, shall be reported as soon as they are available and, in principle, no later than three (3) months from the date of notification of the occurrence.

Note: The European Commission (EC) has established, with the aid of the Implementing Regulation (EU) No 2015/1018, a list classifying the occurrences which should be referred to in the mandatory occurrence reporting under Article 4 paragraph 1 of the Regulation (EU) No 376/2014.

We refer to the BCAA Circular MAS-01 and (EU) 2015/1018.



5.6.2 Voluntary Occurrence Reporting

A system of voluntary occurrence reporting is used to collect information on occurrences:

reported by persons who are not mentioned in Article 4 paragraph 6 of the Regulation (EU) No 376/2014;
which are not included in the list found in the Implementing Regulation (EU) No 2015/1018 classifying occurrences into categories, which must be referred to in case of mandatory occurrence reporting under Article 4 paragraph 1 of the Regulation (EU) No 376/2014.

Only the occurrences presenting a real or potential risk for safety should be reported to the Belgian Civil Aviation Authority. This requires that the aviation organization carries out an analysis to establish the risk of these occurrences for safety.



5.6.3 Exchange of Information

In order to allow the exchange of information, mandatory and voluntarily occurrence reports are sent to the Belgian Civil Aviation Authority using a format compatible with the ECCAIRS software and ADREP system.

EuroPilot Center has opted to use the European reporting portal intended for small and medium-sized aviation organizations that produce few monthly reports.

The mandatory and voluntary reporting of occurrences to the Belgian Civil Aviation Authority is done via the European reporting portal at the following address:

http://www.aviationreporting.eu



5.6.4 Occurrence Reporting Scheme

The overall purpose of the scheme is to make best use of reported information to improve the level of safety performance and not to attribute blame.

The scope of this scheme also includes occurrences not reportable to the authorities. The objectives of the occurrence reporting scheme are to:

enable an assessment to be made of the safety implications of each relevant incident and accident, including previous occurrences of a similar nature, so that any necessary action can be initiated; and
ensure that knowledge of relevant incidents and accidents is disseminated, so that other persons and operators may learn from them.

The scheme is an essential part of the overall monitoring function and it is complementary to the normal day-to-day procedures and ‘control’ systems and is not intended to duplicate or supersede any of them.

All occurrence reports judged reportable by the person submitting the report should be retained as the significance of such reports may only become obvious at a later date.

Every occurrence identified through occurrence reports, voluntary reports or other sources provides the opportunity to draw safety lessons. Learning from experience is only possible if all events are reported and analyzed and their causes and factors (technical, operational, or environmental) are determined and analyzed.

On a daily basis, occurrences (down to simple malfunctions) may affect any process. Some of these occurrences are defined as accident precursors. Accident precursors are occurrences which, without appropriate mitigation, can result in Undesirable Events or accidents.

The Safety Manager is to record, analyse and monitor these occurrences via the Online Safety Management System.

Occurrences are reported via the E-Occurrence Reporting System (E-OR) and recorded in the Online Safety Management System database. The database is analyzed to identify trends and define recommendations to correct possible deviations and avoid accidents.

An occurrence is classified as:

Technical: when its cause is mainly technical;
Operational: when it is mainly due to one or several unsafe acts or unsafe conditions;

It should be recognized, however, that occurrences can feature more than one of thesecomponents.



5.6.5 E-Occurrence Report (E-OR)

An occurrence report shall be filed immediately by any person within EuroPilot Center via the Online E-OR System.

The system can be accessed via the following link:

http://safety.europilotcenter.be

Reports can be filed anonymously via:

http://anoymous.europilotcenter.be

Reporting occurrences is essential for improving safety and is strongly encouraged. EuroPilot Center guarantees that the reporter(s) will not be punished for reporting safety concerns except in the case of illegal act, gross negligence, or a deliberate disregard for regulations and applicable procedures.

Each occurrence report is analyzed, processed and saved by the Safety Manager in the Online Safety Management System.

The analysis focuses on assessing the potential impact on flight safety and may include impacts on personnel, third parties, material, the environment, and EuroPilot Center’s reputation.



5.6.6 Internal Safety Investigation

The scope of internal safety investigations should extend beyond the scope of occurrences required to be reported to the competent authority.

Investigations consist of collecting and analyzing events, determining causal and contributing factors, drawing up conclusions and making safety recommendations.

Investigations are carried out in particular in the case of:

accidents and incidents;
discovery of new hazards and risks;
recurrent safety risks.

Moreover, the Safety Manager may at any time decide to launch an investigation procedure on an opportune basis.

Internal Safety Investigation Process

Stage
Decision to launch an investigation
Put together an investigation team.

Activity Planning
Define and breakdown the activities.
Define the investigation needs.

Data collection
Collect evidence about the event. The following relevant sources can be used:
Physical examination;
Documentation and files;
Interviews with the persons involved;
Observation of actions;
Simulations;
Expert consultancy;
Safety database.

Scenario Identification
Identify/reconstruct the scenario

Scenario Analysis
Analyse the facts, determine the causes and identify the associated hazards.
Integrate all investigation elements.

Risk Assessment
Determine the risk level and assess risk acceptability.

Risk Control/Mitigation Analysis
Determine Corrective/Preventive Action.

Safety Communication
Communicate the investigation results to everyone in the organization by means of Safety Notes and the yearly Safety Bulletin.

Completion of the investigation
Close and archive the file.



5.7 Safety Performance Monitoring and Measurement

Safety performance monitoring and measurement is the process by which the EuroPilot Center’s safety performance is verified in comparison to the overall safety policy and objectives.

Safety performance is defined as the level of safety achievement against the Safety Performance Objectives (SPO’s), using specific Safety Performance Indicators (SPI’s).



5.7.1 Stepwise Approach to Safety Performance Measurement

EuroPilot Center has adopted a step-wise approach to safety performance measurement, based on three levels of SMS maturity.

5.7.1 Stepwise Approach to Safety Performance Measurement

At different levels of maturity of the SMS, the amount of quality safety data available and the issues and actions that are most important for improving safety performance and actions will differ.

EuroPilot Center has, therefore, adopted a step-wise approach to safety performance measurement, based on three levels of SMS maturity.



LEVEL 1 of SMS implementation - Present and Suitable

At the first level, the SMS will have achieved compliance with the applicable requirements. SPI’s should focus on the activities required to maintain basic compliance with the SMS regulatory framework. These can be of a quantitative (numerical) or qualitative (non-numerical) nature:

Quantitative indicators (examples):
the number of safety reviews performed;
the number of staff that received training in SMS;
the number of internal audits performed versus the number of audits planned;

Qualitative indicators (examples):
feedback received from staff on the safety policy;
feedback received from staff on new procedures implemented in the area of internal occurrence reporting or hazard identification.



LEVEL 2 of SMS implementation - Operating and Effective

At this level, EuroPilot Center will start to define more specific SPI’s on the basis of safety data collected through the hazard identification and internal occurrence reporting processes.

More specific, objective and reliable leading performance indicators and precursor event indicators are introduced to identify any weaknesses and areas where improvement is required. These can include:
the number of risk assessments performed following Organizational changes;
the percentage of standard operating procedures that have been subject to hazard identification;
average lead time for completing corrective actions following internal audit;
number of additional procedural controls implemented;

At this level of SMS maturity, EuroPilot Center will be getting a better picture of the risks affecting the operations and the solidity of the risk controls in place.



LEVEL 3 of SMS Implementation - Best Practice

Level 3 is the level where EuroPilot Center will have achieved continuous learning and improvement for all parts of the SMS.

SPI’s are focused around local issues identified from the safety data already collected, and from key safety areas identified by the regulator or identified at an aggregate level from within the industry sector.

SPI’s allow the risk levels related to occurrences to be monitored, the solidity of any barriers and relationship to any accidents.

Risk mitigation actions focus on those issues that present the greatest risks or offer the greatest potential for improvement.

Quantitative indicators:

number of high risk occurrences (coded amber and red);
mean value of risk ratings (over a reference period, e.g. 1 year);
sum of risk ratings (over a reference period, e.g. 1 year);
solidity of risk controls (defenses) (rated from 0 to 5; over a reference period, e.g. 1 year).

Following the implementation of risk mitigation actions, risks are monitored to ensure that risk controls are effective and are indicative of how these controls could be improved.



5.7.2 Fixing Safety Performance Objectives

The process for determining quantitative safety performance objectives for a given period consists of:

measuring the baseline against which safety improvements are to be assessed;
fixing reasonable, yet ambitious targets; and
monitoring target achievement over time and reviewing targets as necessary.

The Safety Manager shall ensure that both the SPO’s and the SPI’s are pertinent and documented.



5.7.3 Process
The Safety Manager shall ensure that the process for safety performance measurement is established and implemented.

SPO’s are monitored over time by the Safety Manager and reviewed by the Safety Review Board or by the Accountable Manager with the Safety Manager.

SPI’s are also reviewed following the implementation of a change.

A report is provided annually to the Safety Review Board and the Accountable Manager. The process of safety performance monitoring and measurement shall include the following:



SAFETY REPORTING
The Safety Manager collects and centralizes EuroPilot Center’s safety reports and monitors the type and number of reported events over time. Additionally, he/she addresses the status of compliance with the applicable requirements.



SAFETY STUDIES
Safety studies consist of a detailed analysis which is used to target broad safety concerns. The Safety Manager shall, whenever appropriate, initiate safety studies addressing subjects of safety relevant to EuroPilot Center.

Safety studies are aimed at gathering additional information on selected topics that has been identified by safety reports or other means. Safety studies are by their nature larger in scope than the analysis of specific hazards. Safety surveys, for example, belong in this category.

Safety studies can address a variety of subjects such as compliance with Standard Operating Procedures, mission preparation and risk assessment of specific operations such as dealing with deteriorating weather, resisting customer pressure, etc.

Safety studies can make use of information published in technical publications from manufacturers, OEM’s, the regulatory authorities, Helicopter Associations and national, European or international Helicopter Safety Initiatives such as EHEST and IHST. This can also include a review of journal articles, accident and incident reports, conference proceedings, press releases and other safety information often available on the internet.

Safety Studies are saved as PDF files and stored in the Safety Study Folder.



SAFETY REVIEWS
Safety reviews, including trend reviews, are conducted during the introduction and deployment of new technologies, change or implementation of procedures, or in situations of structural change to operations.

A safety review should be performed at least once each year by the Safety Review Board and/or by the Safety Manager and Accountable Manager.

The aim of the safety review is to assess:
safety performance against the safety indicators and objectives,
the effectiveness of Safety Management System, including through an assessment of the effect of the corrective and/or preventive actions,
procedures and policies,
Health and Safety.

Possible negative trends and deficiencies may be identified, as well as actions taken to correct these deficiencies by targeting their causes. Corrective actions are to be recorded. A Model is provided under OMM Annex 9 - Corrective Action Follow Up.



SAFETY AUDITS
Safety audits focus on the integrity of the management system and periodically assess the status of safety risk controls.

An audit schedule can be found in Annex 12 - Safety Audit Schedule.

EuroPilot Center addresses all audit findings through appropriate corrective actions in an effort to restore and/or improve the effectiveness of the SMS and safety performance. A Model of is provided under OMM Annex 9 - Corrective Action Follow Up.



Internal Audits
The Safety Manager shall have the responsibility for the internal Safety Audits but may be assisted by another internal or external auditor.



SAFETY SURVEYS
Safety surveys are dedicated qualitative or quantitative (statistical) studies targeting specific safety subjects.

Safety surveys allow particular elements or procedures of a given operation to be evaluated, such as problem areas in daily operations, perceptions, opinions, satisfaction levels and areas of dissent or confusion. Safety surveys can also be used to gather comments and suggestions.



5.8. Emergency Response Planning



5.8.1 General

The EuroPilot Center Emergency Response Plan complies with ORO.GEN.200 and AMC1 ORO.GEN,200(a)(1);(2);(3)(5) point (f) and is designed to help the Organization respond in the case of accidents, serious incidents or any other abnormal events triggering a crisis.

The number of phases that need to be implemented need to be established in order to prevent the confusion which may result when emergency situations arise.

The management must:
identify the responsibilities;
respond to the needs of the applicable Flight Instructor and/or student;
provide assistance to the emergency services, and
inform the authority in charge of any investigation.



5.8.2 Aim of the Emergency Response Plan (ERP)

The EuroPilot Center ERP is designed to cover safety situations which cannot be specifically or precisely defined. An Organizational framework of the actions and policies required to be implemented is presented.

However, it is unlikely that an actual emergency situation will adapt to a precise framework. Adaptability and flexibility should therefore be demonstrated when handling such events.



5.8.3 Events that may activate the ERP

The following events may result in a crisis situation and activate the Emergency Response Plan:
Aviation accident/serious incident;
Disaster in the EuroPilot Center premises: fire, explosion, pollution, flood, etc.;
Loss of the working resource: offices, hangar, aircraft;
Impact of a disaster that happened within the vicinity of the establishment;
Climatic event: snow, storm, flood, lightning, etc.;
Natural disaster: earthquake, etc.;
Food poisoning, epidemic;
Death, suicide at the workplace;
Multiple victims connected to a disaster, illness or contagion;
Accident during the public transportation of the personnel;
Social movements: strike, blocking of the accesses;
Internal or external threat: attack, bomb alert, sabotage, terrorism;
Loss of energy: electricity, gas;
Loss of communication means: internet, landlines or mobile telephones;
Major media event;
Accident during missions: business trip abroad.

5.8.4 OrganizationIt is vitally important that EuroPilot Center is thoroughly prepared in how to react effectively in the case of an emergency. The progress of events will depend on how the Organization initiates an alert (or relays an alert message).

The EuroPilot Center Head of Training is the single point of contact that any member of staff may alert in the case of an emergency. His cellphone number is distributed so this person can bereached out of normal working hours.This single point of contact will be responsible for disseminating the alert to the Organization’s managers and the relevant official authorities.In order to prevent unnecessary delay, the nominated contact must have immediate access to thefollowing:• Emergency checklists to cover the nature of the event.• An up to date list of managers to be contacted and their deputies in the case of absence (aschedule of 'on-call' executives to be contacted should be created).• A list of emergency services and official Organizations to be contacted in the event of anemergency.All employees should know their role in case a serious event occurs, including how to raise the alert, what immediate actions to take to try and resolve the crisis or to prevent the situation deteriorating. EuroPilot Center will carry out an emergency training exercise once a year to practice and refine the procedures and to train personnel.Wherever possible the normal activity of the Organization must be maintained. To this end,employees whose activity is not affected by the situation should continue to carry out their normal duties. Personnel should, however, contact their family and friends to reassure them in an attempt to prevent congest of external communications.If the presence of an employee is not required at the accident/incident site, or at the location of the Crisis Management Team, they should be discouraged from going to these locations so as not to hinder the emergency services and/or any investigation team(s).It is important that personnel not involved in the management of the situation does not contact the Crisis Management Team or speak to the media.5.8.5 Reaction to an Emergency CallWhenever EuroPilot Center is made aware of an accident or incident, the person or departmentthat receives the alert must endeavor to establish the following information points:• Date and time of the call.• Name and contact details of the informant.• The authenticity of the call (where possible).• In the event that the call is made anonymously, try and obtain information concerning the otherparty and their position (where possible, try to record the conversation and listen to backgroundnoise).• Initiate the alert process both in-house and externally.5.8.6 Emergency Numbers

The direct contact details for the members of the Crisis Management Team and the EmergencyServices must be readily accessible and up to date. We refer to OMM Annex 10 - Emergency Contact List

5.8.7 The Crisis Management Center
5.8.7.1 Personnel in chargeThe Crisis Management Team consists of:• the Accountable Manager• the Head of Training• the Chief Operations Officer• the respective Chief Flight Instructor or Chief Theoretical Knowledge Instructor (depending onthe situation)• the Safety Manager
5.8.7.2 Modes of Activating the Crisis Management TeamA. Accidents occurring within EuroPilot Center PremisesAny person who witnesses an accident on the EuroPilot Center premises should comply with thefollowing fundamental safety rules:• Alert the Head of Training• Alert the emergency services (where appropriate)• Protect any victims/casualtiesIf qualified, apply basic first aid while awaiting the arrival of the emergency services.
B. Accidents occurring outside of the EuroPilot Center PremisesIf the call is received by the Head of Training:The On-call Manager informs the Accountable Manager who decides whether or not to activatethe Crisis Management Center.The Chief Operations Officer contacts the members of the Crisis Management Team.If the call is received by a Flight Instructor or Theoretical Knowledge Instructor, or a Student, he/she contacts the Head of Training or, if he is unavailable, the Accountable Manager.5.8.7.3 Activation LevelsLevel 1: Event with potentially hazardous impact but without immediate consequencesThe members of the Crisis Management Team are placed on alert in order to reduce the responsetime should the situation deteriorate. At this level of preparedness, the Crisis Management Teammembers should be contactable and available at all times.Level 2: Event that may have one or several significant impacts on the safety of people or property and on the normal state of operation of the company.The members of the Crisis Management Team should be called to the Crisis Management Center inorder to have a preparatory decision and thereby be in a position to react immediately.

5.8.7.4 Activation
Members of the Crisis Management Team should report to the crisis cell equipped with thefollowing:
• Cellphone;• Crisis management file containing the Emergency Checklists to be followed and the actions tobe taken;
• Laptop computer, if required;• An adequate supply of writing material such as notebooks, pencils, pens, etc.;5.8.7.5 Crisis Log
Once the Crisis Management Center has been activated, all events, decisions and subsequentactions must be recorded in a Crisis Log. This will ensure that an accurate record of actions taken in response to the emergency situation is retained.
5.8.8 Internal and External Communication5.8.8.1 External CommunicationIn the situation where a major event has occurred, it is essential that the Organization implements a detailed communication plan.Once an emergency call has been received and the Crisis Management Center has beenmanned, an initial press release should be disseminated in an attempt to prevent the saturation of lines of communication. Press releases should not contain the name(s) of the persons involved in the accident/incident unless they have been definitively established.Additionally, the names of senior or departmental managers should not be released unlessauthorized.5.8.8.2 Internal CommunicationIn responding to an emergency situation, all or part of the Organizations personnel may beaffected by the event.The management must make a concerted effort, by whatever means appropriate, to inform allpersonnel and students regarding the event.The management must in a timely manner inform the personnel of the steps to be taken inaccordance with the Crisis Management Manual.EuroPilot Center has a strict policy to utilize a ban on disclosing any information outside of the Organization and with the media. Additionally, it is prohibited to all personnel and students to be at the accident/location or at theCrisis Management Center unless required to do so within the scope of their duties.5.8.9 Roles of the Crisis Management TeamThe following paragraphs describe the roles and responsibilities required to be carried out by the Crisis Management Team.5.8.9.1 The Accountable Manager
• Manage internal operations by relying on the members of the Crisis Management Team.• Draws up in conjunction with the Chief Operations Officer press releases to the media.• Appoints or be a spokesperson to communicate with the media.• Ensure that the activities of the company are maintained if not affected by the event.• Be at the disposal of the relevant official Organizations.5.8.9.2 The Head of TrainingA. Gathers any information about the flight and the nature of the accident.B. Compiles a list of all documents about the flight and have them available for the authoritiesincluding:• Copies of weather reports (PIB’s etc.);• Copies of pre-flight planning documents;• Copies of Mass and Balance planning;• Copies of fuel planning and fuel uplift receipts.C. Compiles a list of the administrative documents pertaining to the crew member(s) involvedincluding as a minimum:• Individual Training File(s)• Flight Time and Duty Records• Logbook (if available)• Copy of medical certificates• Copy of flight crew licensesD. In co-operation with the Maintenance Organization, gathers the technical documents relatingto the aircraft involved in the accident.E. Contacts the customer(s) affected by the accident in accordance with any contractualagreements in place.F. Contacts any sub-contracted companies affected by the accident, where appropriate.G. Carries out a short briefing to advise the personnel and students about the situation and theactions to be taken.H. Assists in establishing a list of casualties involved in the accident.I. Compiles a list of all HR documents relating to the personnel and/or students involved in theaccident and have them available for the authorities.J. Ensures that any personnel assigned to carry out any duty at the accident location is provided with the necessary logistics and equipment.K. If necessary, contacts the medical professionals for dealing with emotional trauma.L. Contacts employees who have volunteered to assist in dealing with the families of victims.M. Contacts any consultant/lawyer deemed necessary, dependent on the event.N. Informs the Insurance Companies, depending on the event.5.8.9.3 The Safety Manager
• Draws up conclusions from the EuroPilot Center SMS and safety database(s) regarding previousoccurrences and risk assessments, mitigation and control (various risk controls in place)concerning the safety risk(s) revealed by the event at hand.• Provides these conclusions on previous occurrences and risk assessments to the AccountableManager to enable them to answer any questions correctly to support the protection ofcompany’s reputation.• Assists the Accountable Manager in any other way.• Remains at the disposal of the relevant official organizations.• Updates SMS information (after the crisis).

5.9. Management of Change

EuroPilot Center will manage safety risks related to a change. Management of change is adocumented process to identify external and internal change that may have an adverse effect onsafety. It makes use of existing hazard identification, risk assessment and mitigation processes.
Changes may have various positive or negative safety impacts. Any change that may have anadverse effect on safety shall be identified and managed through EuroPilot Center’s existingprocesses for hazard identification, risk assessment and mitigation.The EuroPilot Center Online Safety Management System (http://sms.europilotcenter.be), contains adatabase of “Hazards” and “Undesirable Events” that needs to be updated for each internal orexternal change.
Different changes can be grouped in a common Safety Impact Assessment, especially if they areintroduced together or if they are inter-related.EuroPilot Center’s change impact assessment procedure is described as follows:Management of Change ProcedureThe accountable Manager will initiate a “change request” to the Safety Manager ANDCompliance Monitoring Manager via e-mail. These could be caused by: e.g. a consequence of a“Regulatory Change Meeting”, changes to the Organization not requiring prior BCAA Approval(e.g Changes in TKI’s FI’s etc), changes to the Organization requiring prior BCAA Approval (e.gchange of name, principle place of business etc.).The Management of Change Procedure, to be executed and managed by the Safety Manager,consists of 4 phases:
PHASE 1 – Receiving the Change RequestPHASE 2 – Analyzing ChangesPHASE 3 – Drafting MoC & Action PlanningPHASE 4 – Closing

5.9.1 Phase 1 – Receiving the Change Request
• Login to PipeDrive and Click on “Projects”.• From the Dropdown list on the right, select the “SM - Regulatory Changes” -Project.• Click on “plus symbol” located inside the first Phase of the Project (or the Green “+ Project”button on the left).• Select the “Management of Change” Template.• Name the Project as per following convention: “Management of Change: MM/YYYY/NR” (e.g.Regulatory Changes: 02/2023/001”)• Enter “Start Date” (Should be the date upon receiving the “Change Request” e-mail from theAccountable Manager).• Enter “End Date” (Should be the anticipated date on when the change should beimplemented).• Select Label” In Progress”• Perform the checklist items under the “PLAN” section of the Project.• When receiving relevant PDF files or other documents, the SM must upload this document viathe “FILES” section of the Project.• The SM should make any notes necessary under the “NOTES” Section of the Project.• When receiving relevant e-mails from official sources, they should be linked to the Project byopening the e-mail in PipeDrive, on the right, enter the Project Name in the textfield underneaththe “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.5.9.2 Phase 2 – Analyzing Changes
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive to obtain all the data collected during Phase 1.• Move the Project to Phase 2.• Start with the Analysis Process based on the PLAN Checklist for this Phase and use the foreseenManagement of Change Worksheet (OMM Annex 28):1. Identify the nature and scope of the change(s).2. Perform the basic initial Impact Assessment study covering:• EuroPilot Center’s operational procedures (Operations Manual)• Work organization (staffing, composition of the teams, scheduling, additionaltraining, etc.)• Infrastructure (relocation, parking base, etc.)• Maintenance of equipment or the aircraft.3. Perform a Safety Risk Analysis (See the Risk Management section4. Identify hazards related to implementing the proposed change5. Identify existing risk controls and define, as appropriate, additional mitigation measures.6. Identify key personnel who will assist in implementing the change5.9.3 Phase 3 – Drafting MoC & Action Planning
• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive.• Move the Project to Phase 3.• Execute the PLAN Checklist for this Phase.• Start drafting the “MoC Worksheet”.• Start drafting the Action Plan.• Start assessing the financial cost of the proposed Action Plan• Export the “MoC Worksheet” into a PDF file and upload this document via the “FILES” section ofthe Project.• Create an Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section.• Select a “TASK” for each Action Item requiring a Task to be fulfilled, add sub-tasks if required.• Allocate the “TASK” to the responsible person within the organization and add a due-date(proposal).• Only select “ACTIVITY” when a certain Action requires a Calendar event such as a Meeting etc.• Once all of the above items have been completed and the Action Plan is prepared under thePLAN section, send the “Management of Change Action Plan” e-mail to the AM, HT, CMM.
5.9.4 Phase 4 – Obtaining BCAA Approval• After the “Management of Change Action Plan” has been reviewed by the AM, HT and CMM,feedback obtained shall be used to update the Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section.• The AM sends an e-mail to the BCAA, clearly outlining the proposed changes, including asigned copy of the Management of Change procedure and Action Plann, in order to obtainprior approval to implement the changes.• Once Approval has been obtained, continue with Phase 5. If unsuccessful, return to Phase 2.5.9.5 Phase 5 – Closing• When receiving the formal Approval E-mail from the BCAA, it should be immediately linked tothe Project by opening the e-mail in PipeDrive, on the right, enter the Project Name in thetextfield underneath the “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.• Based on the deadlines for each Action item, the SM shall follow-up with the person to whomthe Task was allocated. Pipedrive will generate automatic triggers if required.• The SM ensures all Task Items are closed and “archives” the Project.



5.10 Continuous Improvement

EuroPilot Center shall continuously seek to improve its SMS and safety performance.

5.10.1 Improvement of Safety Performance Improvement of Safety Performance

The Safety Manager shall provide a report on safety performance (risk levels, incident and accident figures, etc.) annually to the Accountable Manager.

The report should include a comparison with the levels of safety achieved in previous years. This report can be merged with the one mentioned in the previous paragraph.

Continuous improvement of safety performance should be achieved through:
proactive and reactive evaluations of facilities, equipment, documentation and procedures through safety audits and surveys;
proactive evaluation of each individuals performance to verify the fulfillment of their safety responsibilities; and
a reactive evaluation in order to verify the effectiveness of the system for control and mitigation of risk.



5.10.2 Improvement of the SMS

Continuous improvement of the SMS is achieved through:
Assessment of how the SMS is functioning;
Identification and analysis of possible issues/challenges associated with the running of the SMS;
Implementing changes aimed at improving the SMS;
Monitoring and reviewing the effects of any changes.

Continuous improvement can also be achieved when the SMS is functioning well, performance of the SMS can always be improved.

Measures that can improve the SMS include:
Leaner procedures;
Improved safety reviews, studies and audits;
Improved reporting and analysis tools;
Improved hazards identification and risk assessment processes and improved awareness of risks within EuroPilot Center;
Improved relations with the subcontractors, suppliers and customers regarding safety;
Improved communication processes, including feedback from the personnel and students.

Continuous improvement of the SMS may target any component of the SMS, in other words any subject addressed in this SMM which has the objective of increasing the effectiveness of the system over time.

The Safety Manager performs a review of the SMS (how effectively goals and objectives were met) and he/she provides a report on the SMS (how effectively the SMS works, the stage of implementation, results of audits and review of actions, any issues/challenges and proposals for improvement) annually to the Accountable Manager.



6. SAFETY PROMOTION

Safety Promotion is a process aimed at promoting a culture of safety by ensuring that all personnel in an Organization is aware that, at their level and in their day-to-day activity, they are key players in safety and that everyone, therefore, contributes to an effective SMS.

Managers are important actors of the EuroPilot Center’s Safety Management System. In all the activities they manage, they demonstrate commitment to safety and take care of safety aspects.

They lead by example and have an essential role to play for safety promotion.

Training and effective communication on safety are two important processes supporting safety promotion.



7. CONTRACTED ACTIVITIES

EuroPilot Center may contract certain activities to external Organizations for the provision of services related to areas.

The ultimate responsibility for contracted activities, i.e. for the product or service provided by external Organizations always remains with EuroPilot Center.

A written agreement signed between the EuroPilot Center and the contracted Organization shall clearly define the contracted activities and the applicable requirements.

Activities performed by sub-contractors may have an impact on safety, therefore, the contracted safety related activities need to be addressed through the EuroPilot Center’s Safety Management and Compliance Monitoring program.

As part of the SMS, a risk analysis is to be carried out on any newly contracted activity as part of the Change Management process.

If corrective and/or preventive actions need to be implemented, they are to be submitted in writing to the sub-contractors or suppliers. Effective application of these measures needs to be checked and monitored under the supervision of the Safety Manager.



8. Training and Communication on Safety

Safety training is an integral part of the EuroPilot Center Training Manuals.



8.1 Training

All personnel receives safety training as appropriate for their safety responsibilities. All the records of the safety training provided must be stored in the EuroPilot Center archives.

All personnel receive training to maintain their competences. This includes notification of any changes to applicable regulations and rules, EuroPilot Center’s procedures, and safety-relevant technical matters. This will be communicated through Safety Notes and the yearly Safety Bulletin.

There is a link between training and safety risk management as training and competence development is one of the means through which identified risks can be reduced. Other types of risk controls concern equipment or Organizational factors (e.g. procedures), which in turn can also be addressed in training.

The safety training program may consist of self-study via a Computer Based Training Course, organized by the Safety Manager.



Contents and Training objectives:

Safety Policy
Understand the main elements of the Safety Policy.

Organization, roles and responsibilities
Understand the Organization, roles and responsibilities concerning the SMS. Everyone is to know his or her own role in the SMS.

Safety Objectives
Understand the EuroPilot Center’s safety objectives.

Emergency Response Planning (ERP)
Understand the various roles and responsibilities in the EuroPilot Center’s ERP. Everyone is to know his or her own role in the ERP.

Occurence and hazards reporting
Know the means and procedures for reporting occurrences and hazards.

Safety Risk Management (SRM) process including roles and responsibilities
Understand the Safety Risk Management process. Everyone is to know his or her own role in the SRM.

Continuous improvement of Safety Performance
Understand the principles of continuous improvement of safety performance.

Responsibility when contracting activities
Understand EuroPilot Center’s responsibilities when contracting activities. Everyone is to know his or her own roles and responsibilities regarding this subject.



8.2 Communication

EuroPilot Center has established an effective communication system regarding safety related matters that:
ensures that all personnel is aware of safety management activities as appropriate to their safety responsibilities;
conveys safety critical information, especially related to assessed risks and analyzed hazards;
explains why particular actions are taken; and
explains why safety procedures are introduced or changed.

Communication also reinforces the commitment of everyone to report hazards and occurrences and provides feedback to the reporters (an essential condition for sustained reporting).

Regular meetings are organized with the personnel to communicate safety matters and discuss information, actions and procedures.

Communication is kept simple and appropriate to maximize effect, involve all personnel, and reinforce personal and team commitment to safety.

Communication is open. It encourages discussion, develops EuroPilot Center’s safety culture and makes the most of the lessons learned from running the SMS.

Different communication means can be used:
Safety meetings;
Safety briefings;
Safety Notes via e-mail;
Safety campaigns, safety posters;
The Yearly Safety Bulletin;
Flight safety digests, digest of accidents and incidents (appropriately de-identified), from within and outside EuroPilot Center;
Digest of safety studies, audit reports, survey reports, and safety reviews;
Company forum(s) or professional networks (e.g. LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, etc.);
Subscription to publications and journals.



8.3 Safety Committee Airport Meetings

EuroPilot Center is invited at both training locations for Safety Committee Airport Meetings.When informed by the local Airport Authorities that a Safety Meeting will be held, the SM is the first in line to attend the meeting, followed by the CMM, HT and AM.If no in-person attendance is possible, the e-mail sent by the local Airport Authorities, containing the Safety Meeting Agenda and Minutes, will be used by the SM to execute the following process, consisting of 4 phases:
PHASE 1 – Preparing for the Safety Committee Airport MeetingPHASE 2 – Attending the Meeting and Meeting MinutesPHASE 3 – Action PlanningPHASE 4 – Closing

8.3.1 Phase 1 – Preparing for the Safety Committee Airport Meeting• The Safety Manager receives an invite for a Safety Committee Airport Meeting via e-mail.• He/she logs into PipeDrive and Click on “Projects”.• From the Dropdown list on the right, select the “SM - Safety Committee Airport Meeting”-Project.• Click on “plus symbol” located inside the first Phase of the Project (or the Green “+ Project”button on the left).• Select the “Safety Committee Airport Meeting” Template.• Name the Project as per following convention: “Safety Committee Airport Meeting ICAO IDENT:MM/YYYY” (e.g. Safety Committee Airport Meeting EBAW: 02/2023”)• Enter “Start Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the Safety Meeting).• Enter “End Date” (Should be the scheduled day of the Safety Meeting + 90 days).• Select Label” In Progress”• Perform the checklist items under the “PLAN” section of the Project.• Link the e-mail received from the Airport Authorities to the Project by opening the e-mail inPipeDrive, on the right, enter the Project Name in the textfield underneath the “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.• If relevant for the Meeting, the SM can upload documents via the “FILES” section of the Project.• The SM should briefly analyse the received “Agenda” of the Meeting and use the “NOTES”Section of the Project to provide comments or questions to ask during the meeting.• If the SM cannot attend the Meeting, he/she sends an invite to the CMM, HT and AM includingthe Meeting “Agenda” and his/her notes. I no person can attend the meeting, proceed toPhase 2.
8.3.2 Phase 2 – Attending the Meeting and Meeting Minutes
• The person attending the meeting should open the Project section in Pipedrive in order toobtain all the data collected during Phase 1 and move the Project to Phase 2.• If no person was able to attend the meeting, the SM moves the Project to Phase 2.• During the Meeting (if attended), notes should be updated via the “NOTES” section of theProject.• After the meeting has been held, the Safety Committee Airport Meeting Minutes are receivedvia e-mail, usually in a PDF format.• The Safety Manager is in charge of Linking the e-mail received from the Airport Authoritiescontaining the Meeting Minutes to the Project by opening the e-mail in PipeDrive, on the right,enter the Project Name in the textfield underneath the “Link to a deal/lead/project” -box.• The Safety Manager shall upload the PDF file via the “FILES” section of the Project.8.3.3 Phase 3 – Action Planning
• The SM will be in charge.• Go to the Project section in Pipedrive.• Move the Project to Phase 3.• Analyse the content of the meeting minutes and evaluate if the organization is affected.• Execute the PLAN Checklist for this Phase.• Create an Action Plan via the “PLAN” Section.• Select a “TASK” for each Action Item requiring a Task to be fulfilled, add sub-tasks if required.• Allocate the “TASK” to the responsible person within the organization and add a due-date.• Only select “ACTIVITY” when a certain Action requires a Calendar event such as a Meeting etc.• Once the Action Plan is prepared under the PLAN section, the SM sends the e-mail to the CMM,HT and AM.IMPORTANT! A Safety Committee Airport Meeting may trigger a “Change Request” handled by theSafety Manager, hence may initiate a Management of Change Procedure.8.3.4 PHASE 4 – Closing• The SM will be in charge.• Based on the deadlines for each Action item, the SM shall follow-up with the person to whomthe Task was allocated. Pipedrive will generate automatic triggers if required.• The SM ensures all Task Items are closed and “archives” the Project.









